










1 













































“Q 

Otay ” said the Minister, 

‘‘and make one final sacrifice to save our con 11 try.” 
“No, Herran,” the General replied. 

“I no longer have a country to sacrifice for.” 

It was the end. 

General Simon Jose Antonio 
de las Santtsima Trinidad Bolivar v Palacios 

m 

was leaving forever. 



With that, Simon Bolivar, one of the Western Hemisphere's supreme 
heroes, embarks on a seven-month voyage down the wide Magdalena 
River, Forced from power* made old and til by the pressures of war, pas¬ 
sion, victory, and betrayal, the General reexamines his life, confronting the 
phantoms of his past, reliving the campaigns that brought him renown, and 
remembering the women he loved for a night or a lifetime. On a journey 
that is at once a fantasy of triumphal progress and a nightmare of loss and 
disillusion, we come to know the Liberator—the dazzling orchestral or of 
pt ilitical and military intrigue as well as the lover, the libertine, the tighter 
capable of heroism, mercy , and ruthlcssness 
Here is the Bolivar of flesh and blood, worthy of adoration and anger, 
seen among his enemies and his partisans, rescued from myth and made 
real—yet seen, at the same rime, in the shining romantic aura of the legend 
that formed around him. 


“As always, Garcia Marquez writes like an angel who has blessed us, once 
again, with his magical presence ” —USA Today 







Praise far The General in His Labyrinth: 

“Seldom has there been a more titling match betw een author 
and subject. Mr, (iarela Mirquez w adcs into his flamltovant, 
often improbable and ultimately tragic material with enor¬ 
mous gusto, heaping detail upon sensuous detail, alternating 
grace with horror, perfume with the stench of corruption, 
the elegant language of public ceremony w ith the vulgarity 
<>l private moments, the rationalistic clarity of Bolivar’s 
thought with the malarial intensity of emotions." 

—Margaret Atwood, 

The New J bri Times Book Review 


“A stunning portrait, convincing and poignant, . . Aiourde 

force" 

—San Francisco Cbromde 


“Rhythmic, spare, classically elegant , . , (iarela Marquezs 
li« ilivar comes across with a full measure of human ambigu¬ 
ity, w ith frailties as well as the magnanimity of soul and 
expansiveness of vision that led him to attempt to form the 
largest republic in the world " 

— The / foust on / W 


“As usual, Garcia Marquezs craftsmanship is nothing less 
than superb. I (is General’s story is tragic. Ins telling of it is 
luminous r 


—The Dallas Morning Sews 




“Brilliant , . . The General in His Lalryrintb is a book of many 
riches, . . Intricate in its interweaving of imagery and its 
overlapping of various years and events in the General's life " 

—7 be Detroit News 


“Energizing the (knerals dreams and reminiscences with his 
own gift of poetic imagination, Mr* Garcia Mlrquez ani¬ 
mates this novel with wonderfully vivid images and scenes,” 

—The New York Times 


iarda Marquez brings to life a dying man in al' his vctingly 
eccentric, majestic individuality and makes his fate carry 
universal resonance.” 

—Entertainment \ \ eekly 

“A book of many riches . , Provocative and rew arding on 

manv different let els" 

#> 

—St. Petersburg Times 


M \ distinguished book , * * < iarcia Mdrquez splendidly pre¬ 
sents liis image of Latin America and of a great man reduv.” 

—Richard Bder, 

The Im Angeles Times Book Review 


“Garcia Marquez gives us a meticulously drawn* down-to- 
canh jxjrtraii of the great revolutionist and liberator” 

—The Houston Post 





“Gabriel Garcia Marquez has shown m the power of the 
word* imagining a comment u hose landscape—melancholy, 
endlessly nostalgic, and profusely magical—is now forever a 
pari of the world's literary consciousness. . , , He uses his 
enormous resources of charm and of magical hyperbole to 
hold our interest in ways other than psychological." 

—The Boston Sunday Globe 


I he authors most readable Iwxifc yet , . , His words are 

lush, and readers will come awav with a sense of Bolfvars 

0 

humid, wearv world and its rich odor of decay.” 

* -r 

—'The Milwaukee Journal 

u The great (larcia Marquez has produced what is perhaps 
his major political workm fiction. . . . A magnificent facade 
of splendid prose, creating a tragedy worthy of Lear on the 
heath" 

— The Sew ark Star-Ledger 

“Passage after passage shines uiih the brilliance of Mr 
Garcia Marquez. . . . Me has invented some of the magic 
characters of our age. His General* however, is not «>nlv 
magic, but real;* 

— The Wall Street Journal 

“Masterful and fascinating . . . Garcia Mdrquezs most pow¬ 
erful book yet" 


Sew fork Sewsday 



PtNtiUlN BOOKS 

THE GENERAL IN HIS LABYRINTH 

(blind Garcia Mirqucz was Ixirn in \racataca, Colombia, in 
1928, l leattended the i ni versify of tiignti and later \% tirked as 
a reporter for the (iolombian newspaper El Espectudur and as a 
foreign coiTespindent in Rome, Paris, Barcelona, Caracas, and 
New York. He is the author of many novels and collections of 
stories—including No OiU U rim to the Colonel and Other Stories, 
The Autumn of the fhtnarch, innocent Erendira and Other Stones, 
Chronicle of a Death Foretold, Drat in the Time of Cholera, and One 
Hundred )ears of Solitude. Garcia Marquez was awarded the 
Nobet Prize for Literature in 1982, I ie lives in Mexico City, 

V 


GABRIEL 

GARCIA 

MARQUEZ 

TRANSLATED FROM i H £ SPANISH 


BY EDITH GROSSMAN 



THE GENERA! 
IN HIS 
LABYRINTH 


PENGUIN BOOKS 



PKN(,1 IV tW* ifc* 

Published by tlie Kfenguin Group 

Viking IVngniri. j dm sum tii lAmguin Brinks L S \ Inc , 
r5 i iudson Sircct. New Vt»rk, New Virk 1«Hi> , l4„ l !> 
hmguin B*n>Ls Ud, 2” Wnghts I jiic, London VVK HZ* hngl-uu) 
lAnginu Books Vtistnilia tad, V ktrirra, \ys(r-tfia 

Pfcngmn Hch.j4;s Canada lid, 2H< 11 John Street, 

Markhim, Unurio. * anadj UR IB+ 

Hhngutn BiMiUtN.Z.) \ a &, 182-IVf) Wiirau Brad, 

Auckland 10, New Zealand 

)\ngum Buih tM Registered Office*: Htnwadi^'Kih, Middlesex, fiighml 

Firit published in the United States id \nicriL i In Vi (red A Knopf, Inc I'-'W 
friHidinl mIVngmn Books I'^L 

10 9 8 7 6 14 3 2) 

Copyright 4 (i ah riel Card* \Uri|ur/ t 1*J90 
Man com 1 right v> Ocurer ( olhert, 1990 
All ngh ti reLrved ' 

A portion of this work was previously published in The Sew Ibrktr 

Originally published in Spam as bJ Vmtraf tm An LaberttrtQ bv Mondidfin 1 .paru . 
Madrid 

< ops right CaliridGarcliMlrquc?, I9M9 (r' i fght O Mondadon h>pana, S A . 
1989 

mi iimtvHv ur hom.kihs itvs t msiikjumj tub hawdojoh \\ iih-Ums 
Gjtcu Mirque^ Calirid 
[t tcftcfal en su labcrimn English] 

The general in his labyrinth / by Gabriel f i*rc£# Mirquet.; 
translated frwn the Spanish by Ldith tin ftsman 
p. cm. 

Imnshbou oh Kl general en su J ibermto 

ISBN 0- 594-j8258-6 (fie.) 

ISBN 0 HOI 4HW0ipbM 

I IWfvar. Simtai, I7W«-—KivrHin 1 IrtJe 

K?»lW.n.A7K^llJ 

063—dc20 90-339S7 

iVinred jn the United h-iotcs of America 

* 

I- u-t-pt m the United Stales of \rnericii, this bnok is sold subject 
to the condition that it shall mil* b\ w ay of trade or other* ise. k km. 
re-st Jd, hired out, r»r uc herwise circulated w ithout ihe publishers poor 
c*w mo art ,im hirm nf binding or cover other than that m si bk’h it 
is published and without a similar corn! if km tin hiding (ho* cmvdiiifju 
I icing impost d on the sulisequent purchaser. 






to it ALVARO MUTES, 


who gave me the idea for writing this book 





It seems that the devil controls the business of my life, 

(LITTER to SANTANDER, AUGUST 4, l8lj) 




e General in His Labyrinth 



<s p ■ ■, 



Via P a 

timo 


ivar 


t:\Rr v,iw 


r.B / p««.iui iiirF' 

TillW* jHarranca Nucva 
J T/amhrano l 

[X fxN. 

H «Ucaft,i 
V v [PuertoHcii 


C \R \CAS* 

Venezuela 


Kitumi 


HondftJ/npduas - u 

J ftlacjjjrivi w 
^ / "SANTA PF w B< XjOTA 

N UEVA G R A NA DA- 




quitc/ 


Brasil 


Ecuador 


ft# tf rfl w il 11 


kiJAmrlrm 














































jose palacios, his oldest servant, found him floating 
naked with his eyes open in the purifying waters of his 
bath and thought he had drowmed. He knew this was 
one of the many ways the General meditated, but the 
ecstasy in which he lay drifting seemed that of a man no 
longer of this world. He did not dare come closer but 
called to him in a hushed voice, complying with the order 
to awaken him before five so they could leave at dawn. 
The General came out of his trance and saw in the half- 
light the clear blue eyes, the curly squirrel-colored hair, 
the impassive dignity of the steward who attended him 
every day and who held in his hand a cup of the curative 
infusion of poppies and gum arabic. The General's hands 
lacked strength when he grasped the handles of the tub, 
but he rose up from the medicinal waters in a dolphin¬ 
like rush that was surprising in so wasted a body. 

“Let’s go," he said, “as fast as we can. No one loves 
us here.” 

Jose Palacios had heard him say this so many times and 




The General in His Labyrinth 


on so many different occasions that he stili did not be¬ 
lieve it was true, even though the pack animals were 
ready in the stables and the members of the official dele¬ 
gation were beginning to assemble. In any event, he helped 
him to dry and draped the square poncho from the up¬ 
lands over his naked body because the trembling of his 
hands made the cup rattle. Months before, while putting 
on a pair of chamois trousers he had not wom since his 
Babylonian nights in Lima, the General discovered he 
was losing height as well as weight. Even his nakedness 
was distinctive, for his body was pale and his face and 
hands seemed scorched by exposure to the weather. He 
had turned forty-six this past July, but his rough Carib¬ 
bean curls were already ashen, his bones were twisted by 
premature old age, and he had deteriorated so much he 
did not seem capable of lasting until the following July. 
Yet his resolute gestures appeared to be those of a man 
less damaged by life, and he strode without stopping in a 
circle around nothing. He drank the tea in five scorching 
swallows that almost blistered his tongue, avoiding his 
own watery trail along the frayed rush mats on the door, 
and it was as if he had drunk the magic potion of resur¬ 
rection. But he did not say a word until five o'clock had 
sounded in the hell tower of the nearby cathedral. 

a* 

“Saturday, May 8, 1830, the Day of the Blessed Vir¬ 
gin. Mediatrix of all Grace," announced the steward. “It 
has been raining since three o’clock in the morning.’’ 

“Since three o'clock in the morning of the seventeenth 
century,” said the Genera! his voice still shaken by the 
bitter breath of insomnia. And he added, in all seriousness; 
“I didn’t hear the roosters." 

“There are no roosters here," said Jose Palacios. 




5 


“There’s nothing here," said the General. “It's the land 
of the infidel.” 

For they were in Santa Fe de Bogota, city of the Holy 
Faith, two thousand six hundred meters above the level 
of the distant sea, and the cavernous bedroom with its 
bare walls, exposed to the icy winds that filtered through 
ill-fitting windows, was not the most favorable for any¬ 
one’s health. Jose Palacios placed the basin of lather on 
the marble top of the dressing table, along with the red 
velvet case that held the shaving implements, all of golden 
metal. He put the small candleholder with its candle on 
a ledge near the mirror so the General would have enough 
light, and he brought the brazier to warm his feet. Then 
he handed him the spectacles with squared lenses and thin 
silver frames that he always carried for him in his jacket 
pocket. The General put them on and began to shave, 
guiding the razor with as much skill in his left hand as in 
his right, for his ambidexterity was natural to him, and 
he showed astonishing control of the same wrist that 
minutes before could not hold a cup. He finished shaving 
by touch, still walking around the room, for he tried to 
see himself in the mirror as link as possible so he would 
not have to look into his ow r n eves. Then he plucked the 
hairs in his nose and cars, polished his perfect teeth with 
charcoal powder on a silver-handled silk brush, trimmed 
and buffed the nails on his fingers and toes, and at last 
took off the poncho and poured a large vial of cologne 
over his entire body, rubbing it in with both hands until 
the flask was empty. I hat dawn he officiated at the daily 
mass of his ablutions with more frenetic severity than 
usual, trying to purge his body and spirit of twenty years 
of fruitless wars and the disiliusionments of powxr. 




The General in His Labyrinth 


The last visitor he received the night before was Ma- 
nuela Saenz, the bold Quitena who loved him but was not 
going to follow him to his death. As always she would 
remain hehind, charged with keeping the General in¬ 
formed of everything that happened in his absence, since 
for some time he had trusted no one but her. 1 le left in 
her care some articles whose only value was that they 
had belonged to him, as well as some of his most prized 
books and two chests containing his personal archives. 
The previous day, during their brief formal farewell, he 
had said to her: “I love you a great deal, but 1 will love 
you even more if you show more judgment now than 
ever before." She understood this as another of the many 
homages he had paid to her in their eight years of ardent 
love. Of all the people he knew, she was the only one 
who believed him: this time it was true that he was leav¬ 
ing. Bur she was also the only person who had at least 
one telling reason for expecting him to return. 

They had not intended to see each other again before 
the journey. Nevertheless, the lady of the house wanted 
to present them with the gift of a final, secret farewell, 
and she had Manuela, dressed in a cavalry uniform, enter 
through the main stable doors in order to sidestep the 
prejudices of the overpious local community. Not be¬ 
cause they were clandestine lovers, for they were lovers 
in the full light of day and with great public scandal, but 
to preserve at all costs the good name of rhe house. Me 
was even more careful, for he ordered Jose Palacios not 
to close the door to the adjoining room that was a neces¬ 
sary passageway for the household servants and where 
the aides-de-camp on guard duty played cards until long 
after the visit was over. 




7 


.Ylanuela read ro him for two hours. She had been 
young unril a short time before, when her flesh began ro 
overtake her age. She smoked a sailor’s pipe, used the 
verbena water favored by the military* as her perfume, 
dressed in men’s clothing, and spent rime with soldiers, 
but her husky voice still suited the penumbra of love. 
She read by the scant light of the candle, sitting in an 
armchair that bore the last viceroy's coat of arms, and 
he listened to her in bed, lying on his back, dressed in 
the civilian clothes he wore at home and covered by the 
vicuna poncho. Only the rhythm of his breathing indi¬ 
cated that he was not asleep. The book, by the Peruvian 
Noe Catzadillas, was entitled A Reading of News and 
Gossip Circulating in Lima in the l 'ear of Our Lord t 8 a 6 , 
and she read with a theatrical emphasis that matched the 
author's style very well. 

For the next hour her voice was all that could be heard 
in the sleeping house. But after the last w atch a sudden 
chorus of men's laughter erupted, rousing all the dogs in 
the courtyard. He opened his eyes, more intrigued than 
disturbed, and she closed the book in her lap, marking 
the page with her rhumb, 

“Those are your friends," she said to him. 

"I have no friends," he said “And if I do have any left 
it won t be for long/ 1 

“Well, there they are outside, standing guard so you 
won t be killed,” she said. 

That was how the General learned what the whole 
city already knew; not one but several assassination plots 
against him were brewing, and his last supporters were 
in the house to try to thwart them. The entrance and the 
corridors around the interior garden were held by hussars 



The General in His Labyrinth 


and grenadiers, the Venezuelans who would accompany 
him to the port of Cartagena de Indias, where he was to 
board a sailing ship to Europe. Two of them had placed 
their sleeping mats across the main doorway to the bed¬ 
room, and the aides-de-camp would continue playing 
cards in the adjoining room after Manuela finished read¬ 
ing, but surrounded by so many soldiers of uncertain 
origin and diverse character, this was not the time for 
feeling safe about anything. He showed no reaction to the 
bad news, and with a wave of his hand he ordered Ma¬ 
nuela to continue reading. 

He always considered death an unavoidable profes¬ 
sional hazard. He had fought alt his wars in the front 
lines, without suffering a scratch, and he had moved 
through enemy fire with such thoughtless serenity that 
even his officers accepted the easy explanation that he 
believed himself invulnerable. He had emerged unharmed 
from every assassination plot against him, and on several 
occasions his life had been saved because he was not 
sleeping in his own bed. He did not use an escort, and 
he ate and drank with no concern for what was offered 
him, or where. Only Manuela knew that his disinterest 
was not lack of awareness or fatalism, but rather the mel¬ 
ancholy certainty that he would die in his bed, poor and 
naked and without the consolation of public gratitude. 

The only noteworthy change he made that night in 
the ritual of his insomnia was that he did not take a hot 
bath before getting into bed. Jose Palacios had prepared 
it early, with water steeped in medicinal leaves to heal 
the General’s body and facilitate expectoration, and had 
kept it at a good temperature for whenever he might 
want it. But he did not want it. He rook two laxative 






9 


pills for his chronic constipation and settled down to 
doze to the soothing murmur of Lima's gallant gossip* 
Then, without warning or apparent cause, he was over¬ 
come by an attack of coughing that seemed to shake the 
very foundations of the house. l~he officers gambling in 
the adjacent room were stunned. One of chan, the Irish¬ 
man Bdford Hinmn Wilson, came to the door in case 
he was needed, and he sa%v the General lying face down 
on the bed, trying to vomit up his insides. Manucla w as 
holding his head over the basin, Jose Palacios, the only 
man authorized to enter his bedroom without knocking, 
stood on the alert, next to the bed, until the crisis passed. 
Then, with his eyes full of tears, the General took a 
deep breath and pointed to the dressing table, 

“Those graveyard flowers arc to blamed he said. 

As always, for he always found some unpredictable 
cause for his misfortunes, Manuela, who knew him better 
than anyone, made a sign to Jose Palacios to take away 
the vase with the mornings withered spikenards. The 
General stretched out again on the bed and closed his 
eyes, and she resumed reading in the same tone as before. 
Only when it seemed to her that he had fallen asleep did 
she place the book on the night table, kiss his forehead, 
scared with fever, and whisper to Jose Palacios that alter 
six o’clock that morning she would be waiting for a last 
goodbye at Cuatro Esquinas, where the King's Highway 
to Honda began. She wrapped herself in a battle cloak 
and tiptoed out of the bedroom. Then the General opened 
his eyes and said to Jose Palacios in a thin voice: 

“Tell Wilson to take her home/' 

The order was carried out against Mamiela's will, for 
she thought she could protect herself better than a squad- 



The General in His Labyrinth 


ran of lancers* Jose Palacios lit their way to the stables, 
around an interior garden with a stone fountain, where 
the first spikenards of the dawn were beginning to open* 
The rain had stopped and the wind no longer whistled 
through the trees, but there was not a single star in the 
frozen sky. Colonel Bet ford Wilson repeated the pass¬ 
word as he walked in order to quiet the sentries lying 
on straw mats in the corridor* When he passed the win¬ 
dow of the principal reception room, Jose Palacios saw 
the master of the house serving coffee to the group of 
friends, military and civilian, who had volunteered to 
stand watch until the moment of departure* 

When he returned to the bedroom he found the Gen¬ 
eral in the clutches of delirium. He heard him utter dis¬ 
connected phrases that all fit roget her into one: “Nobody 
understood anything*" His body burned in a bonfire of 
fever, and he was farting stony, foul-smelling gas. The 
next day not even the General would be able to cell if he 
had been talking in his sleep or raving while awake, and 
he would not remember anything he said* These were 
what he called u my crises of dementia/ 1 They no longer 
alarmed anyone, since he had suffered them for over 
four years without any doctor risking a scientific expla¬ 
nation, and the following day would find him risen from 
the ashes with his reason intact. Jose Palacios wrapped 
him in a blanket, left the candle burning on the marble 
top of the dressing table, and went out without closing 
the door so he could continue watching from the adjoin¬ 
ing room. He knew he would recover sometime at day¬ 
break and immerse himself in the icy waters of the bath 
in an effort ro restore the strength that had been ravaged 
by the horror of his nightmares. 




It was the end of a clamorous day. A garrison of seven 
hundred eighty-nine hussars and grenadiers had rebelled 
on the pretext of demanding payment of wages they had 
not received for the past three months. But the real reason 
was this; most of them were from Venezuela, and many 
had fought wars for the liberation of four different na¬ 
tions, but in recent weeks they had been the victims of 
so much vituperation and provocation on the streets that 
they had cause to fear for their safety after the General 
left the country. The conflict was settled by payment of 
their travel expenses and a thousand gold pesos instead 
of the seventy thousand the insurgents had asked for, and 
at dusk they had marched away to their native land, fol¬ 
lowed by a pack of women with their baggage and all their 
children and domestic animals. i he din of the bass drums 
and the military brass band could not drown out the tu¬ 
multuous shouting of the mobs that set their dogs on them 
and hurled strings of firecrackers at their feet to make 
them break step, acrions they had never taken against 
enemy troops. Eleven years earlier, after three long cen¬ 
turies of Spanish domination, the brutal Viceroy Don Juan 
Santana had fled through those same streets disguised as a 
pilgrim, bur his trunks were full of gold statues and uncut 
emeralds, sacred toucans and brilliant stained-glass butter¬ 
flies from Muzn, and there was no lack of people to weep 
for him from their balconies and throw flowers in his parh 
and offer him heartfelt wishes for a calm sea and a pros¬ 
perous voyage. 

Without moving from the house that had been lent to 
him by the .Minister of the Army and Navy, the General 
had played a secret pan in negotiating the conflict, and 
in the end he had ordered General Jose Laurencin Silva, 




The General in His Labyrinth 


his nephew by marriage and a trusted aide, to leave with 
the rebellious troops as a guarantee that there would be 
no new disturbances before they reached the Venezuelan 
border. He did not see the parade under his balcony, blit 
he had heard the bugles and the drumrolls, and the rau¬ 
cous yells of the throngs in the street, whose shouts he 
could not understand. He attributed so little importance 
to them that he reviewed back correspondence with his 
secretaries and dictated a letter co Grand Marshal Don 
Andres de Santa Cruz, the President of Bolivia, in which 
he announced his withdrawal from power but was not 
very certain whether he would travel abroad, “I won’t 
write another letter for the rest of my life/’ he said when 
he had finished* Later, while he was sweating his siesta 
fever* the sound of distant disturbances penetrated his 
sleep, and he was startled awake by a series of explosions 
that could just as well have been insurgency as fire¬ 
works* But when he asked about it he was told it was a 
fiesta. That was all: "It's a fiesta* General.” And no one, 
not even lose Palacios, would have dared to explain just 
what fiesta it was. 

Only when Manuela told him that night during her 
visir did he learn that it was the followers of his political 
enemies* the demagogue party as he called them, who, 
with the compliance of the police, were roaming the 
streets and inciting the artisans guilds against him. It was 
Friday, market day* which made it easier to create dis¬ 
order in the main square. A heavier rain than usual, ac¬ 
companied by thunder and lightning* dispersed the rioters 
at nightfall. But the damage was done. Students from 
the Academy of San Bartolome had assaulted and seized 
the offices of the Supreme Court in order to force a pub- 




*3 


lie trial of the General, and they had slashed w ith bayo¬ 
nets and then hurled down from the balcony his life-size 

m 

portrait painted in oils by a veteran of the liberating 
army. The mobs, drunk on corn liquor, had looted the 
shops along the Calle Real as well as the bars in the poor 
suburbs that had not dosed down in time, and in the 
main square they shot a general stuffed with sawdust, 
which did not need the long blue tunic with gold buttons 
for everyone to know who it was. They accused him of 
being the secret instigator of the military uprising in a 
belated effort to regain the power he had exercised for 
twelve uninterrupted years and that the Congress had 
taken away from him by unanimous vote. They accused 
him of wanting to be president for life so he could ap¬ 
point a Huropean prmce as his successor, I hey accused 
him of pretending to travel abroad when in reality he was 
going to the Venezuelan border and planned to return at 
the head of the insurgent troops in order to seize power, 
Public walls were plastered with papelmkas, the popular 
name for the abusive broadsides printed against him, and 
his best-known followers remained in hiding in other 
people’s houses until passions cooled. The press devoted 
to General Francisco de Paula Santander, his principal 
enemy, had taken to its bosom the rumor that the Gen- 

M 

cral’s mysterious anti very well publicized illness, and 
the tiresome, ostentatious show he made of leaving, were 
mere political ruses to make pet,pie beg him to stay. That 
night, while Manuela Saenz recounted derails of the peril¬ 
ous day, the soldiers of the Interim President were trying 
to wipe away a sentence scrawled in charcoal on the wall 
of the Episcopal Palace: “He won’t leave and he won’t 
die." The General sighed, 




The General in His Labyrinth 


" Things must be very bad," he said, "and getting even 
worse for me if this could happen only a block from 
here and they could make me think it was a fiesta. 1 ’ 

The truth was that even his most intimate friends did 
not believe he was abandoning either power or the coun¬ 
try. The city was too small and his own people too punc¬ 
tilious not to know the two gs eat flaws in his dubious 
departure: he did not have enough money to go anywhere 
with such a large entourage, and having been President 
of the Republic, he could not leave the country before 
a year had passed without the permission of the govern¬ 
ment, and he had not even had the guile to request it. 
The order to pack, which he gave in an obvious manner 
so that anyone who wanted to could hear it, was not taken 
as decisive proof even by Jose Palacios, for on other occa¬ 
sions he had gone to the extreme of leaving a house empty 
in order to feign his departure, and it had always been 
a clever political maneuver. His military aides felt that 
the symptoms of disillusionment had been too evident 
during the last year. Nevertheless, the same thing had 
occurred before, and when they least expected it they 
had seen him awaken with new spirit and take up again 
the thread of his life with more enthusiasm than ever. 
Jose Palacios, who always followed these unpredictable 
changes at close range, said it in his own way: “Only my 
master knows what my master is thinking." 

His repeated renunciations of power had been incor¬ 
porated into popular song, beginning with the first one, 
an ambiguous statement in rhe very speech with which 
he had assumed the presidency: “My first day of peace 
will be my last one in power/' fn the years that followed, 
his renunciations were reiterated so many times, and in 




»5 


such dissimilar circumstances, that no one ever knew 
again which to believe. The most sensational of all had 
occurred two years earlier, on the night of September 25, 
when he escaped unharmed from an attempt to assassinate 
him right in the bedroom of Government House, The 
congressional delegation thar visited him at dawn, afrer 
he had spent six hours under a bridge, exposed to the 
weather, found him wrapped in a woolen blanket with 
his ieet in a basin of hot water, but not as shaken by 
fever as by disillusion. He announced that the conspiracy 
would not be investigated, thar no one would be prose¬ 
cuted, and thar the Congress designated for the coming 
year would meet without delay to elect another President 
of the Republic. 

"After that," he concluded, ‘ I will leave Colombia 
forever/' 

Nevertheless, the investigation took place, the guilty 
were judged with an iron hand, and fourteen were shot 
in the main square. The Constituent Congress of Janu¬ 
ary i did not meet for another sixteen months, and no one 
spoke again of his resignation. Rut during that time there 
was no foreign visitor, or chance companion, or casual 
acquaintance, to whom he did not say: 4 "1 will go where 
I am wanted/’ 

The public announcements of his fatal disease were 
also not taken as valid evidence of his departure. No one 
doubted he was ilk On rhe contrary, since his last return 
from the southern wars everyone who had seen him pass 
beneath the floral arches was struck by the astounding 
idea that he had returned only to die, Instead of Palomo 

w 

Blanco, his historic horse, he came back riding a poor 
bald mule with trappings of straw, his hair had turned 


The General in His Labyrinth 

gray and his forehead was furrowed by passing storm 
clouds, and he wore a dirty tunic with a torn sleeve. The 
glory had left his body. At die gloomy reception held 
for him that night at Government House he was morose 
and uncommunicative, and no one ever knew if it was 
political perversity or simple distraction that made him 
greet one of his ministers by another's name. 

Not even his moribund appearance was enough to make 
anyone believe he was leaving—for six years they had 
said he was dying, and still he preserved intact his desire 
to rule. I he first report had been brought by a British 
naval officer who chanced to see him in the Pativilca 
Desert north of Lima at the height of the war for the 
liberation of the south. He found him lying on the door 
of a miserable hut char served as an improvised head¬ 
quarters, wrapped in a barracan cloak, with a rag tied 
around his head because he could not bear the cold in 
his bones during the hellish noonday heat, and too weak 
even to chase away the hens pecking the ground around 
iiim. After an awkward conversation interrupted by out¬ 
bursts of dementia, he said goodbye to his visitor with 
dramatic pathos: 

“Go and tell the world how you saw me die covered 
with chicken shit on these inhospitable sands.” 

i hey said his illness was a kind of madness caused by 
the mercurial desert sun. Then they said he was dying in 
Guayaquil, and later in Quito, of a gastric fever whose 
most alarming symptom was lack of interest in the world 
and absolute spiritual calm. No one ever learned the scien¬ 
tific basis for these reports, for he had always been op¬ 
posed to medical science, and he diagnosed and treated 
himself according to Donosticrrc's La nit: dec me a votre 



17 


mmUre, a French manual of home remedies chat lose 
Palacios carried wherever he went as an oracle for under¬ 
standing and curing any disturbance of body or soul. 

In any case, there had never been a death agony more 
fruitful than his. For while they thought he was dying in 
Pativilca he crossed the Andean peaks again, conquered at 
juni'n* completed the liberation of all of Spanish America 
with the final victory at Ayacucho, created the Republic 
of Bolivia, and was happier in Lima and more intoxicated 
with glory than he had evei been before or would ever 
be again. As a consequence, the repeared announcements 
that he at last was leaving power and country because of 
illness, and the formal public ceremonies that seemed to 
confirm them, were no more than idle repetitions of a 
drama too often seen to be believed. 

A few days after his return, at the end of a bitter meet¬ 
ing of the Council of State, he took Field Marshal Antonio 
Jose de Sucre by the arm. “Stay with me," he said. He 
led him to his private office, where he received only a 
select few, and he almost forced him to sit in his personal 
armchair. 

“Thar place is more yours now than mine/' he said. 

The Field Marshal of Avacucho, his intimate friend, 
was well aware of the state of the nation, but the General 
gave him a derailed accounting before he came to the 
point. In a few days the Constituent Congress would 
meet to elect the President of the Republic and approve 
a new constitution in a belated effort to save the golden 
dream of continental unity. Peru, dominated by a reac¬ 
tionary aristocracy, seemed irretrievable. General An¬ 
dres de Santa Cruz was leading Bolivia by the nose down 
a path of his own making. Venezuela, under the imped- 


The General in His Labyrinth 

mis rule of General Jose Antonio Paez, had just pro¬ 
claimed its autonomy. General Juan Jose Flores, Prefect 
General in the south, had united Guayaquil and Quito to 
create the independent Republic of Ecuador. The Re¬ 
public of Colombia, the embryo of an immense, unified 
nation, had been reduced to the size of the former Vice- 
regency of New Granada. Sixteen million Americans 
who had just begun their life of freedom were at the 
mercy of local tyrants. 

¥ m 

‘in short/' the General concluded, “everything we 
created with our hands is being trampled on by others/ 1 
‘it's destiny’s joke/' said Field Marshal Sucre, it 
seems we planted the ideal at independence so deep that 
now these countries are trying to win their independence 
from each other/’ 

The General’s response was spirited* 

“Don’t repeat the enemy 's vile remarks/’ he said, “even 
when they're as accurate as that one/’ 

Field Marshal Sucre apologized. He was intelligent, 
methodical, shv, and superstitious, and he had a sweetness 
in his face that old smallpox scars could not diminish. The 
General, who loved him so well, had said of him that he 
feigned a modesty he did not possess. He was a hero at 
Pichincha, fumusla, and Tarqui, and not long after his 
twenty-ninth birthday he had commanded the glorious 
hustle of Ayacucho, which destroyed the last Spanish 
stronghold in South America. But more than for these 
achievements he was notable for the goodness of his heart 
in victory and for his talent as a statesman. At that mo¬ 
ment he had renounced his offices, used no military mark- 
mgs of any kind, and wore a black wool greatcoat that 


reached down to his ankles and always had its collar 
turned up to protect him against the stabbing glacial 
winds from the nearby hills* His only involvement with 
the nation, and he desired it to be his last, was to partici¬ 
pate in the Constituent Congress as a deputy from Quito, 
He was thirty-five years old, as healthy as a rock, and 
mad w r ith love for Doha Mariana Carcclen, the Marquise 
of Solanda, a beautiful and vivacious Quite ha just out of 
adolescence whom he had married by proxy tuo years 
earlier and with whom he had a six-month-old daughter. 

The General could not imagine anyone better qualified 
to succeed him as President of the Republic. He knew 
he was five years roo young for the office, according to 
a constitutional limitation imposed by General Rafael 
Urdaneta in order to block Sucre's way. Nevertheless, 
the Genera! was taking secret steps to amend the amend¬ 
ment. 

“Accept,” he said to him, “and 1 will stay on as Gen¬ 
eralissimo, circling the government like a bull round a 
herd of cows.” 

His appearance was feeble but his determination was 
powerful. Nevertheless, the Field Marshal had known 
for some time that the General's seat would never be his. 
A short while before, when the possibility of becoming 
president was first suggested to him, he had said he would 
never govern a nation whose structure and future direc¬ 
tion w ere growing more and more hazardous. In his opin¬ 
ion, the first step toward correction was to distance the 
military from power, and he wanted to propose to the 
Congress that no general could become president for 
the next four years, perhaps with the intention of block- 


The General m His Labyrinth 

ing Urdaneta’s way. But the strongest opponents of this 
amendment would be the strongest men of all: the gen¬ 
erals themselves. 

‘I am too tired to work without a compass," said Sucre. 
"Besides, Your Excellency knows as well as I do that 
what will be needed here is not a president but a breaker 
of insurrections.” 

He would attend the Constituent Congress, of course, 
and he would even accept the honor of presiding if it 
was offered to him. But nothing more, ■‘uurtcen years of 
wars had taught him rhere was no greater victory than 
being alive. The presidency of Bolivia, that vast, unex¬ 
plored country which he had founded and governed with 
a wise hand, had taught him the capriciousness of power, 
I he wisdom of his heart had taught him the vanity of 
glory. ‘‘And therefore no. Excellency," he concluded. 
On June i 3, the Feast of Saint Anthony, he would be in 
Quito with his wife and daughter to celebrate with them 
not only that saint’s day but all the others the future 
might hold in store for him. His determination to live for 
them, and only for them, in the joy of love, had been 
made this past Christmas. 

“it is all I ask of life," he said. 

I he General was livid. "I thought nothing could sur¬ 
prise me anymore," he said. And he looked into his eyes. 

“Is this your last word?” 

“ The next to last," said Sucre. “My last word is mv 
eternal gratitude for all Your Excellency’s kindness.” 

i he General slapped his own thigh to wake himself 
out of an irredeemable dream. 

“Good," he said. “You have just made the last deci¬ 
sion of my life for me." 


I hat night he composed his resignation under the de¬ 
moralizing effect of an emetic prescribed by a chance 
physician to calm his biliousness. On January 30 he opened 
the Constituent Congress with a farewell address in which 
he praised its president. Field Marshal Sucre, as the wor¬ 
thiest of generals, i he praise drew an ovation from the 
Congress, but a deputy who was near Urdaneta whis¬ 
pered in his ear: “1 hat means there's a general worthier 
than you.’’ The General’s remark and the deputy's malice 
were like two burning nails in the heart of General Kafaet 
Urdaneta. 

And with reason. Even if Urdaneta did not enjoy 
Sucre’s immense military achievements or his great pow¬ 
ers to charm, there was no reason to think he was any 
less worthy. His presence of mind and his constancy had 
been extolled by the General himself, his fidelity and his 
love for him had been proved many times over, and he 
was one of the few men in this world who dared tell him 
to his face the truths he was afraid to hear. Conscious of 
his mistake, the General rried to make amends in the 
galley proofs, and in his own hand he changed “the 
worthiest of generals” to read “one of the worthiest.” 
The correction did not mitigate Urdaneta’s rancor. 

Days later, at a meeting between the General and loyal 
deputies, Urdaneta accused him of pretending to leave 
while secretly trying to be reelected. Three years earlier 
General Jose Antonio Paez had seized power in the De¬ 
partment of Venezuela in a first attempt at separation 
from Colombia. The Genera! went to Caracas and effec¬ 
ted a reconciliation with Paez in a public embrace amid 
hymns of jubilation and ringing bells, and he created a 
special made-to-measure regime for Paez that allowed 


The General in His Labyrinth 


him to rule however he pleased. ‘That’s where the di¬ 
saster began/' said Urdaneia. For the accommodation had 
not only led to poisoned relations with the New Grana¬ 
dans but also infected them with the germ of separatism. 
Now, Urdaneta concluded, the greatest service the Gen¬ 
eral could render the nation would be to renounce with¬ 
out delay the habit of command and leave the country. 
The General replied with comparable vehemence. But 
Urdaneta was an upright man who spike with skill and 
passion, and he left everyone with the impression that 
they had witnessed the ruin of a deep, long-standing 
friendship. 

The General repeated his resignation and designated 
Don Domingo Caycedo as Interim President until Con¬ 
gress elected a permanent leader. On March i he left 
Government House by the service entrance in order to 

if 

avoid the guests who were toasting his successor with 
champagne, and he drove in a borrowed carriage to Fucha 
Manor, an idyllic retreat on the outskirts of the city 
which the provisional President had lent to him. The 
simple knowledge that he was no more than an ordinary 
citizen intensified the devastating effects of the emetic. 
He was half awake when he asked Jose Palacios to pre¬ 
pare the materials he would need to write his memoirs, 
lose Palacios brought him ink and enough paper for forty 
years of memories, and he advised Fernando, the Gen¬ 
eral’s nephew and secretary, so that he would be ready 
to offer his services on the following Monday at four 
o’clock in the morning, which was rhe General's best 
rime for thinking, with all his rancor fresh and raw. Ac¬ 
cording to what he had often told his nephew, he wanted 
to begin with his oldest memory, a dream he had on the 


2 3 


Hacienda San Mateo, in Venezuela, not long after his 
third birthday. He dreamed that a black mule with gold 
reerh had come inside and gone through the house from 
the principal reception room to the pantries, eating with¬ 
out haste everything in its path while the family and 
slaves were taking their siestas, until at last it had eaten 
the curtains, the rugs, the lamps, the vases, the table 
service and linen in the dining room, the saints in the 
altars, the wardrobes and chests wirh all their contents, 
the pots in the kitchens, the doors and windows with 
their hinges and bolts, and all the furniture from the 
portico to the bedrooms, and the only thing left intact 
was the oval of his mother s dressing table mirror, float¬ 
ing in its own space. 

But he felt so content in the house at Fucha, and the 
air was so soft under a sky of hurrying clouds, that he 
did not mention his memoirs again but used the dawns 
to walk the fragrant paths of the savanna. Those who 
visited him in the days that followed had the impression 
he had recuperated, and the officers above all, his most 
loyal friends, urged him to remain in the presidency even 
if it was by military coup. He discouraged them with the 
argument that power by force was unworthy of his glory, 
but he did not seem to reject altogether the hope of being 
confirmed bv a legitimate decision of Congress. Jose Pa¬ 
lacios repeared: “Only my master knows what mv master 
is thinking.” 

Manuela continued to live a few' steps from San Carlos 
Palace, the presidential residence, with her ear tuned to 
the talk in the streets. She came to Fucha two or three 
times a week, more often if she had urgent news, bring¬ 
ing marzipan and sweets fresh from the convents, and 


The General in His Labyrinth 


bars of chocolate with cinnamon for their four o'clock 
tea. She almost never brought the newspapers, because 
the < icnerai had become so susceptible to criticism that 
any trivial misgiving could unhinge him. On the other 
hand, she reported intrigues in infinite detail, the be¬ 
trayals in the salons and the prognostications of the rumor 
mills, and he had to listen to these with his guts in a knot 
even when thev were critical of him, because she was the 

■F 

onlv person permitted to tell him the truth. When they 
did not have a great deal to say to each other they re¬ 
viewed his correspondence, or she read to him, or they 
played cards with the aides-de-camp, but they always 
had lunch alone- 

They had met in Quito eight years before at a gala ball 
to celebrate the liberation, when she was still the wife of 
Dr. James Thorne, an ! nglish gentleman who had be¬ 
come established among the aristocrats of Lima during 
the final days of the vice regency. In addition to being the 
last woman with whom the General maintained a long¬ 
term liaison after the death of his wife, twenrv-seven 
years earlier, she was also his confidante, the guardian 
of his archives, his most impassioned reader, and a mem¬ 
ber of his staff wirh the rank of colonel The days were 
long past when she had been ready to bite off his ear 
during a jealous quarrel, but their most trivial conversa¬ 
tions still tended to end with the explosions of hatred and 
the tender reconciliations of a great love affair. Manuel a 
did not sleep at the manor house. She left early enough 
so that darkness would not take her by surprise en route, 
above all during that season of brief twilights. 

In contrast to what had occurred at La Magdalena 
Manor in Lima, where he had to invent pretexts for 


2 5 


keeping her at a distance while he took his pleasure with 
ladies who were highborn and with others who were 
less so, at Fucha Manor he showed signs of not being able 
to live without her. He would watch the mad she had 
to travel, he plagued Jose Palacios, asking him the time 
every few seconds, requesting that he change the place¬ 
ment of his armchair, that he stir up the fire, that he 
pur it out, that he light it again, and he was impatient and 
ill-humored until he saw her coach appear from behind 
rhe hills and lighr up his life. But he showed sic'ns of the 
same agitation when her visit lasted longer than expected. 
When it was time for siesta they would get into bed 
without closing the door, without undressing, without 
sleeping, and more than once thev made the mistake of 
attempting one final lovemaking, for he refused to admit 
he no longer hid enough bodily substance to gratify 
her soul. 

During this time his tenacious insomnia show-ed signs 
of disruption. He would fall asleep at any hour, in the 
middle of a sentence while dictating a letter, or during 
a card game, and even he was not really certain if they 
were sudden bursts of sleep or brief fainting spells, but 
as soon as he lay down he felt overcome by a crisis of 
lucidity. He would just slip into a mire of half-sleep at 
daybreak, until he was awakened again by the w ind of 
peace in the trees. Then he did not resist the temptation 
to put off dictating his memoirs for yet another morning 
in order to take a solitary walk rhat sometimes lasted until 
lunchtime. 

He would go without an escort, without the two faith¬ 
ful dogs that had accompanied him even on the battle¬ 
field, without any of his epic horses, which had already 


The General in His Labyrinth 


been sold to the ha real ion of hussars to increase his travel 
funds* He would walk to the nearby river over the 
blanket of decayed leaves on the interminable tree-lined 
paths* protected from the icy savanna winds by the vicuna 
poncho, the boots lined with raw wool, and the green 
silk cap he used to wear only for sleeping* He would 
sit for a long while to meditate in the shade of the weep* 
mg willows, lacing the narrow bridge made of loose 
planks, absorbed in the river currents he had once com¬ 
pared to the destiny of men, in a rhetorical simile worthy 
of his childhood tutor, Don Simon Rodriguez. One of 
\m guards would follow him, unseen, until he returned 
soaked with dew and with a thread of breath almost too 
thin for him to climb the steps to the portico, haggard 
and dazed but with the eyes of a happy madman. He felt 
so content during those evasive walks that the hidden 
guards would hear im through the trees, singing the 
soldiers' songs he used to sing in the years of his legendary 
glories and his Homeric defeats* Those who knew him 
best asked themselves the reason for his high spirits when 
Manueia herself doubted he would be confirmed another 
time as President of the Republic by a Constituent Con¬ 
gress even he had described us admirable. 

On the day of the election, during his morning wal k 
he saw a greyhound without its owner chasing quail 
through the hedges. He called to it with a street*corner 
whistle, and the animal made an abrupt stop, looked for 
him with ears erect, and found him \vith his poncho al¬ 
most dragging on the ground, his cap worthy of a Floren¬ 
tine pontiff* forsaken by God between the swift-moving 
clouds and the immense plain. It smelled him with pains¬ 
taking care while he caressed its coat with his fingertips* 


l l 


but then the dog leaped away in ;i sudden rush, looked 
into his eyes with its golden eyes, growled with suspicion, 
and fled in tear. He followed along an unfamiliar path 
that ended in a poor suburb of muddy narrow streets 
and red-roofed adobe houses from whose patios rose the 
smell of milking* I le heard the sudden shout: 

“Skinny Shanks! 1 ’ 

He did not have time to dodge the cow manure that 
was hurled at him from a stable, smashed into the middle 
of his chest, and spattered his face, But it was the words 
more than the explosion of dung that w oke him from the 
stupor in which he had lived since leaving the presidential 
residence* He knew the nickname the New Granadans 
had given him: it was the name of a madman famous for 
his theatrical uniforms, Even one of the senators who 
called themselves liberals had used the name in Congress 
in his absence, and only two men had stood up to protest. 
But he had never heard it in person* He began to wipe his 
face with the edge of the poncho, and had not yet finished 
when the unseen guard who was following him ran out 
from between the trees with his sword drawn to punish 
the insult. He turned on him in a burning flash of anger. 
“And what the hell are you doing here* 1 ' he asked* 
The officer snapped to attention. 

*Tm following orders. Excellency* 11 
I'm not your excellency, 1 he replied* 

He stripped him of his ranks and titles with so much 
rage that the officer considered himself fortunate that 
the General no longer had the strength for a more savage 
reprisal Even Jose Palacios, who understood him so well, 
found it difficult to understand his severity. 

•9 

If was a disastrous day, 1 Ic spent the morning walking 


The General in His Labyrinth 


around the house as distraught as when he was waiting 
for Manucla, but lie concealed from no one that this 
rime his longing was not for her but for news from the 
Congress. Minute bv minute be attempted to calculate 
the detailed progress of the session. When Jose Palacios 
answered that it was ten o’clock, he said; “No matter 
how the demagogues want to go on braying, they must 
have begun voting by now.*’ Then, after a long period of 
reflection, he wondered aloud; “Who can know w'hat 
a man like Urdaneta is thinking?" lose Palacios knew' 
that the General knew, because Urdaneta was still pro¬ 
claiming far and w ide the cause and extent of his resent¬ 
ment. Once, as Jose Palacios happened to be walking past, 
the General asked in an offhand manner: “Whom do you 

m 

think Sucre will vote for?" Jose Palacios knew as well as 
he that Field Marshal Sucre could not vote because he 
was on a congressional mission to Venezuela with the 
Bishop of Santa Marta, Monsignor Jose Maria Estevez, 
to negotiate the terms of that country's separation. And 
so he did not stop when he answered: “You know that 
better than anyone. Senor.” The General smiled for the 
first time since he had returned from his abominable walk. 

Despite his erratic appetite he almost always sat at the 
tahle before eleven o'clock to eat a boiled egg with a 
glass of port, or to pick ar a wedge of cheese, but that 
day he watched the road from the terrace while the 
others had lunch, and he was so absorbed not even Jose 
Palacios dared to disturb him* It was past three o’clock 
when he heard the sound of the mules' hooves before he 
saw Manucla s carriage coming over the hills, and he 
leaped from the chair. He ran to receive her, he opened 
the door to help her down, and from the moment he saw 


29 


her face he knew* Don Joaquin Mosqucra, the oldest son 
of an illustrious family from Popayan, had been elected 
President of the Republic by unanimous vote. 

His reaction was not so much anger or disillusion as 
astonishment, for he himself had suggested the name of 
Don Joaquin Mosqucra to the Congress in the certainty 
he would not accept. He sank into deep thought, and he 
did not speak again until tea, "Not a single vote for me 5 " 
he asked. Not a single one. Nevertheless, the official dele¬ 
gation of devoted deputies who visited him later ex¬ 
plained that his followers had agreed to make the vote 
unanimous so he would not appear to be the loser in a 
bitter contest. He was so irritated, he did not seem to 
appreciate the subtlety of thar gallant maneuver. He 
thought, instead, it would have been worthier of his glory 
if they had accepted his resignation the first time he of- 
fered it. 

“The long and short of it is/’ he sighed, “that the 
demagogues have won again, and twice over.' 1 

Nevertheless, he was very careful to hide his conster¬ 
nation until he said goodbye to them on the portico. But 
their coaches had not been lost from view when he was 
struck down bv a crisis of coughing that kept the manor 
house in a state of alarm until nightfall. One of the mem¬ 
bers of the official delegation had said that the decision 
of the Congress had been so prudent it had saved rhe Re¬ 
public. He ignored the remark, but that night, while 
Manuela was obliging him to drink a cup of broth, he 
said to her: M No congress ever saved a republic/' Before 
going to bed he assembled his aides and servants, and with 
the solemnity that was customary in his dubious renuncia¬ 
tions he announced: 


The General in His Labyrinth 


'‘Tomorrow I leave the country." 

ft was not tomorrow, hut four days later. In the mean¬ 
time he recovered his lost equanimity, dictated a farewell 
proclamation in which he did not betray the wounds to 
his heart, and returned to the city to prepare for the 
journey. General Pedro Alcantara Herran, Minister of 
the Army and Navy in the new government, brought him 
to his house on Calle La Ensenanza, not so much to offer 
hospitality as to protect him from the death threats that 
were becoming more and more alarming. 

Before leaving Santa Fc dc Bogota he liquidated the 
little of value he still owned in order to increase his 
treasury. In addition ro the horses, he sold a silver service 
dating back to the lavish days of Potosi, which was ap¬ 
praised at two thousand five hundred pesos by the Mint 
for the simple value of the metal, without taking into 
account the beauty of its workmanship or its historic im¬ 
portance. When the final reckoning was made, he had 
seventeen thousand six hundred pesos and sixty centavos 
in cash, a draft for eight thousand pesos drawn on the 
public treasury of Cartagena, a pension for life granted 
him by the Congress, and a little over six hundred ounces 
of gold distributed among various trunks. 1 his was the 
woeful remnant of a personal fortune that on the day of 
his birth had been considered among the greatest in the 
Americas. 

On the morning of their departure, in the bags that 
Jose Palacios packed without haste while the General 
finished dressing, there were only two well-worn sets 
of underclothing, two changes of shirt, the battle tunic 
with a double row of buttons that were supposed to have 
been made from the gold of Arahualpa, the silk cap for 


3i 


sleeping, and a red hood that Field Marsha] Sucre had 
brought him from Bolivia. His footwear consisted of his 
house slippers and the patent-leather boots he would be 
wearing. In his personal trunks Jose Palacios was carrying, 
along with the chest of medicines and a few other articles 
of value, Rousseau's Social Contract and The Art of ll'jr 
by the Italian genera! Raimundo .Montecuccoli, two bib¬ 
liographical treasures that had belonged to Napoleon 
Bonaparte and bad been given to him by Sir Robert Wil¬ 
son, the father of his aide-de-camp. There was so little 
that it all fit into a soldier’s knapsack. When he saw it as 
he was about to go to the room where the official delega¬ 
tion was waiting, he said: 

"We never would have believed, my dear Jose, that 
so much glory could fit into a shoe." 

His seven pack mules, however, were carrying chests 
full of medals and gold tableware and numerous objects 
of a certain value, ten trunks of private papers, two of 
books he had read and at least five of clothing, and several 
chests w ith all manner of good and bad things rhar no one 
had the patience to tally. All of this* however, was not 
even a shadow of the baggage he had brought with him 
on his return from Lima three years earlier, when he was 
invested with triple power as President of Bolivia and 
Colombia and Dictator of Peru: a drove of pack ani¬ 
mals carrying seventy-two trunks and over tour hundred 
chests with count less objects whose value had not been 
established. On that occasion he had left in Quito more 
than six hundred books, which he never attempted to 
recover. 

It was almost six o'clock. The millenarian drizzle had 
stopped for a moment, but the world was still cloudy and 


The General in 11is Labyrinth 


cold, and the house, taken over by the troops, had begun 
to emit a foul barracks smell. The hussars and the grena¬ 
diers scrambled to their feet when they saw the taciturn 
General approaching from the end of the corridor, sur¬ 
rounded bv his aides-de-camp and looking green in the 
light of dawn, his poncho thrown across his shoulder and 
his broad-brimmed hat making the shadows of his face 
even deeper. Following an old Andean superstition he 
covered his mouth with a handkerchief soaked in cologne 
as protection against harmful drafts caused by abrupt 
exposure ro the weather. He did not wear any insignia of 
his rank, and there was no trace left of the immense 
authority he had once possessed, but the magic halo of 
power distinguished him from the noisy rerinue of of¬ 
ficers. He walked toward the drawing room at an un¬ 
hurried pace along the corridor, lined with straw matting, 
that encircled the interior garden, indifferent to the sol¬ 
diers of the guard who snapped to attention as he passed. 
Before entering the drawing room he tucked the hand¬ 
kerchief into his cuff, as only clerics did now, and handed 
his hat to one of the aides-de-camp. 

In addition to those who had kept watch in the house, 
other civilians and soldiers had been arriving since dawn. 
They were drinking coffee in scattered groups, and their 
somber clothing and hushed voices had rarefied the atmo¬ 
sphere with a mou rnful solemnity. 1 Me sudden sharp voice 
of a diplomat rose above the whispers: 

"This looks like a funeral.” 

No sooner had he spoken than he sensed the cloud of 
cologne saturating the air in the room behind him. Then 
he turned, holding a cup of steaming coffee between 
his rhumb and forefinger, and he was disturbed by the 


33 


thought that the phantom who had just walked in might 
have heard his impertinence. But no; although the Gen¬ 
eral's last visit to Europe had been twenty-four years 
earlier, when he was very young, his fond European 
memories were sharper than his resentment. And so the 
diplomat was the first he approached, in order to greet 
him with the extreme courtesy he believed the English 
deserved* 

'I hope there is not much fog this fall in ! Jyde Park," 
he said* 

l he diplomat experienced a moment s hesitation, for 
in recent days he had heard that the General was going 
to rhree different places, and none of them was London. 
But he recovered in an instant. 

“We will try to have the sun shining night and day for 
Your Excellency," he said. 

The new President was nor there, for the Congress had 
elected him in absentia and lie would need more rhan a 
month to arrive from Popayan. In his stead w as General 
Domingo Caycedo, the Vice-President-elect, of whom 
it had been said that any office in the Republic was too 
restrictive for him because he had the bearing and dis¬ 
tinction of a king. The General greeted him with great 
deference and said in jest: 

“Do you know 1 don’t have permission to leave the 
country ?” 

Everyone greeted his statement with laughter, although 
everyone knew it was not a joke. General Caycedo prom¬ 
ised he would send a valid passport to Honda by the 
next post. 

The official delegation was composed of the Arch¬ 
bishop of the city and other notable men and high- 


The General in His Labyrinth 


ranking officials with their wives* The civilians wore 
chaps and the military wore riding boors, for their in¬ 
tention was ro accompany the illustrious exile for several 
leagues. The General kissed the Archbishop's ring and 
the ladies' hands, and shook the gentlemen's hands with¬ 
out effusiveness, an absolute master of well-bred cere¬ 
mony but a total stranger to the kind favored in that 
ambiguous city, about which he had said on more than 
one occasion: "This isn't my theater.' 1 He greeted them 
all in turn as he walked through the room, and for each 
he had a phrase learned with all due deliberation in the 
manuals of etiquette, but he looked no one in the eye. 
His voice was metallic and cracked with fever, and his 
Caribbean accent, which so many years of travels and 
the tribulations of war had not softened, sounded even 
harsher compared to the lush diction of the Andeans. 

When he completed his greetings, the Interim Presi¬ 
dent handed him a paper signed by numerous distin¬ 
guished New- Granadans expressing the nation's gratitude 
for so many years of service. In yet another tribute to 
local formality he pretended to read it before the silent 
company, for he could not have seen it without spectacles 
and unless the handwriting were larger. And vet when he 
pretended to have finished, he directed a few brief words 
of gratitude to the delegation, which were so appropriate 
to the occasion that no one could have said he had not 
read the document. Then he looked around the room, and 
without hiding a certain amount of concern, he asked; 

"Didn't Urdaneta come?" 

The Interim President informed him that General Raf¬ 
ael Urdaneta had left with rbe rebel troops in support 
of General Jose riaurencio Silva's precautionary mission. 


35 


Then someone let his voice he heard above the others: 

“Sucre didn’t come either/’ 

He could not ignore the malicious intention of that 
unsolicited report. His eyes, which had been dimmed 
and aloof until that moment, flashed with feverish inten¬ 
sity and he replied, not knowing to whom: 

The Field Marshal of Ayacucho was not informed of 
the time of our departure, so as not to interfere with his 
mission/ 1 

It was apparent he did not know that Field Marshal 
Sucre had returned two days earlier from his failed mis- 

(F 

sion to Venezuela, where he had not been allowed to 
enter his own country. No one had told him the General 

m 

was leaving, perhaps because it had nor occurred to any¬ 
one ihar he was not the first to know. Jose Palacios 
learned this at a difficult moment, and then he forgot it 
in the confusion of their final days. He did not discount, 
of course, the dreadful idea that Field Marshal Sucre 
might feel resentful at not being informed. 

In the adjoining dining room the tabic was laid with 
a splendid American breakfast: tamales in corn husks, 
blood sausage w ith rice, eggs scrambled in casserole, a 
rich variety of pastries on lace cloths, and pots of hot 
chocolate as thick as perfumed paste. The hosts had de¬ 
layed breakfast in the event he agreed to preside over the 
table, although they knew that in the morning he took 
nothing but the infusion of poppies and gum arabic. In 
any case, the lady of the house fulfilled her obligations 
by inviting him to sit in the armchair reserved for him 
at the head of the table, but he declined the honor and 
addressed everyone with a formal smile, 

“My road is a long one," he said, “Enjoy your meal.” 


The General in His Labyrinth 


He stood on tiptoe to take his leave of the Interim 
President, who responded with an enormous embrace 
that allowed everyone to see how small the General’s 
body was, how forsaken and defenseless he looked when 
it was time for farewells. Then he shook all the gentle¬ 
men’s hands again and kissed the ladies’ hands. Someone 
attempted to detain him until the weather cleared, al¬ 
though both of them knew it would not clear for the rest 
of the century. Moreover, his desire to leave without 
delay was so evident that attempting to keep him seemed 
an impertinence* ! lie master of the house walked with 
him to the stables through the invisible drizzle in the 
garden* He had tried to assist the General by holding his 
arm with his fingertips* as if it were made of glass* and 
he was amazed at the tension of the energy coursing be¬ 
neath his skin like a secret torrent that bore no relation¬ 
ship to the impoverishment of his body* Representatives 
of the government* the diplomatic corps* and the armed 
forces, with mud up to their ankles and their cloaks 
soaked w iih rain* were waiting to accompany him on 
the first stage of his journey* No one was certain* how¬ 
ever, who was there for the sake of friendship, who in 
order to protect him* and w ho to be sure that in fact he 
was leaving. 

The mule reserved for him was the best of a pack of 
one hundred presented to the government by a Spanish 
merchant in exchange for canceling his indictment as a 
horse thief. The General already had his boot in the 
stirrup that the groom was holding for him when the 
Minister of the Army and Navy called to him: “Excel¬ 
lency." He stood motionless* his foot still in the stirrup 
and both hands holding the saddle* 


37 


“Stay/ 1 said the Minister, "and make one final sacrifice 
to save our country/' 

“No, Herrin/' he replied. “I no longer have a country 
to sacrifice for/ 1 

It was the end. General Simon Jose Antonio de la San- 
tisima Trinidad Bolivar y Palacios was leaving forever. 
He had wrested from Spanish domination an empire five 
times more vast than all of Europe, he had led twenty 
years of wars to keep it free and united, and he had gov¬ 
erned it with a firm hand until the week before, hut 
when it w as time to leave he did nor even cake away with 
him the consolation that anyone believed in his depar¬ 
ture. The only man with enough lucidity to know he 
really was going, and where he was going to, was the 
English diplomat, who wrote in an official report to his 
government; “'I he time he has left will hardly be enough 
for him to reach his grave/' 


the first day's travel had been the most trying, 
and would have been even for someone less ill than he, 
for his mood had been twisted by the larval antagonism 
he sensed in the streets of Santa Fe de Bogota on the morn¬ 
ing of his departure. The light was just beginning to pene¬ 
trate the drizzle, and he encountered only a tew stray 
cows along the way, but the rancor of his enemies hung 
heavy in the air. Despite the government's precautionary 
order that he be escorted through the quieter streets, the 
Genera] still saw the insults painted on convent walls. 

Beside him rode Jose Palacios, who wore what he al¬ 
ways wore, even in the heat of battle: the sacramental 
frock coat, the topaz pin in his silk tie, the kidskin gloves, 
and the brocade vest crossed by the chains of 1 is two 
identical watches. The trimmings on his saddle were nf 
Potosi silver and his spurs were made of gold, and for this 
reason, he had been mistaken for the President in more 
than one Andean village. Nevertheless, the diligence with 
which he attended to even the slightest whim of his mas¬ 
ter made any such confusion unthinkable. Jose Palacios 


The General in His Labyrinth 


knew and loved him so well he could feel in his own 
flesh the pain of this furtive departure from a city that at 
one time had made the mere announcement of his arrival 
reason enough for patriotic fiestas. Less than three years 
earlier, when he had returned from the arid southern 
wars weighted down by more glory than any American, 
living or dead, had ever won before* he had been greeted 
by a history-making spontaneous reception* Those were 
still the days when people would grasp his horse by the 
halter and stop him in the street to complain about public 
services or taxes, or to ask him for favors, or simply to 
feet themselves close to the radiance of greatness* Me 
would pay as much attention to petitioners in the street 
as he did to the most serious matters of state, demonstrat¬ 
ing a surprising knowledge of each one's domestic trou¬ 
bles, or the condition of his business, or the state of his 
health, and every man who spoke to him was left with the 
impression that he had shared for a moment in the joys 
of power. 

No one would have believed he was the same man, or 
that this taciturn place he was leaving forever, with all 
the wariness of an outlaw, was the same city* Nowhere 
had he felt so much a stranger as in those stiff, narrow 
streets, the identical houses with dark roofs and private 
gardens filled with sweet-smelling flowers* where, over 
a slow flame, a village community simmered whose af¬ 
fected manners and crafty speech hid more than they 
told. And nevertheless, although if might have seemed 
to him then a trick uf the imagination, this was the same 
city of fog and icy winds he had selected long before he 
saw it as the place to build his glory, the same city he had 
loved more than any other and had idealized as the ccn- 


4 1 


rer and reason of his life and the capita] of half the world. 

When the final reckoning came he seemed more sur¬ 
prised than anyone at the loss of his prestige. 1 he govern¬ 
ment had posted hiddenguards even at the least dangerous 
locations, and this prevented a confrontation with the 
choleric gangs of hoodlums who had shot him in effigy 
the previous afternoon, bur all along the route he could 
hear the same distant shout: “Skinnv Shaaaaanks!'' The 

r 

one soul who took pity on him was a beggar woman, who 
said as he passed by: 

"Go with God, phantom.’’ 

No one showed any sign of hearing her. The Genera! 
sank into a brooding gloom and rode on. lost to the world, 
until they came out onto the grandeur of the savanna. 
At < iuatro I squinas, where the paved road began, Manu- 
ela Saenz, alone and on horseback, was waiting for the 
entourage to pass, and she kept her distance as she waved 
a last goodbve to the General. He waved back and con¬ 
tinued on his way. They never saw each other again. 

The drizzle stopped a short while later, rhe sky turned 
radiant blue, and two snow-covered volcanoes remained 
at the same spot on the horizon for the rest of the day. 
Bur this time he displayed none of his passion for nature, 
he took no notice of either the villages they passed 
through at a steady trot or the greetings of the people 
who did not recognize them. And yet what seemed most 
extraordinary to his companions was that he did not 
have so much as a tender glance for the magnificent herds 
of horses on the numerous breeding farms in the savanna 
—the sight, as he had often said, that he loved best in 
the world. 

In Facatariva. the village where they slept the first 


The General in His Labyrinth 


night, the General said goodbye to his spontaneous com¬ 
panions and continued the journey with his permanent 
entourage* There were five men in addition to Jose Pa¬ 
lacios General Jose Maria Carreno, whose right arm had 
been amputated as the result of a wound received in com¬ 
bat; his Irish aidc-de-camp, Colonel Belford Hinton Wil¬ 
son, the son of Sir Robert Wilson, a general who had 
fought in almost all the wars of Europe; Fernando, his 
nephew, aide-de-camp, and clerk, who held the rank of 
lieutenant and was the son of his older brother, who ! id 
died in a shipwreck during the Kim Republic; his kins¬ 
man and aide-de-camp Captain Andres Ibarra, whose 
right arm had been disabled by a saber cut during the 
assault of September 25 two years before; and Colonel 
Jose de la Crux Paredes, who had proven himsel f in count¬ 
less campaigns for independence. The honor guard was 
composed of one hundred hussars and grenadiers selected 
from the best of the Venezuelan contingent* 

Jose Palacios took special care of two dogs that had 
been taken as booty in Alto Peru* 1 hey were beautiful 
and brave and had served as watchdogs at Government 
House in Santa Fc de Bogota until two of their com¬ 
panions had been slashed ro death on the night of the 
attempted assassination. On the interminable journeys 
from Lima to Quito, from Quito to Santa Fc de Bogota, 
from Santa Fe de Bogota ro Caracas, and back again to 
Quito and Guayaquil, the two dogs had watched over 
the cargo, walking alongside the pack animals. They 
did the same on the final journey from Santa Fe de Bo¬ 
gota to Cartagena, although this time there was less cargo, 
and it was guarded by the trnops. 

The General awoke in Facatattvl in a bad temper, but 


43 


his mood improved as they descended from the upland 
plateau through rolling hills and the climate grew more 
temperate and the light less harsh. They invited him sev¬ 
eral times to rest, for his physical condition was cause for 
concern, but he preferred to go on, nor stopping for 
lunch, until they reached the hortands. He often said 
that the motion of his horse helped him to think, and he 
would travel for days and nights on end, changing mounts 
several times so as not to ride them to death. He had the 
bowed legs of old cavalrymen and the gait of those who 
sleep with their spurs on, and a callus as hard as a barber's 
leather strop had formed on his buttocks, earning him 
the honorable nickname Iron Ass. Since the beginning of 
the wars for independence he had ridden eighteen thou¬ 
sand leagues: more than twice the distance around the 
world. No one had ever disproved the legend that he 
slept in the saddle. 

After midday, when they were already beginning to 
feel the hot breath rising up from the ravines, they agreed 
to rest in the cloister of a mission. The Mother Superior 
attended them in person, and a group of indigenous nov¬ 
ices gave them marzipan fresh from the oven and a grainy 
com masato to drink that was about to ferment. When 
she saw the column of sweating soldiers in their hap¬ 
hazard uniforms, the Mother Superior must have thought 
Colonel Wilson was rhe highest-ranking officer, perhaps 
because he was good-looking and blond and wore the 
uniform with the best trimmings, and she concerned her¬ 
self only with him, displaying a very feminine deference 
that provoked evil-minded comments. 

Jose Palacios did not disabuse her of her mistake so 
that his master, wrapped in a wool blanket to sweat out 


The General in His Labyrinth 


his fever, could rest in the shade of the ceiba trees in the 
cloister. There he remained, not eating or sleeping, lis¬ 
tening through a fog to New W orld love songs sting by 
the novices to the harp accompaniment of an older nun. 
When they finished, one of them walked through the 
cloister with a hat, begging alms for the mission. The 
nun with the harp said to her as she passed; ‘‘Don't ask 
the sick one for anything,” But the novice took no notice, 
T he General, without even looking at her, said with a 
bitter smile: l Tm the one who needs charity, my girl,” 
Wilson gave from his own purse with so much generosity 
that he earned a cordial jest from his superior; “Now, 
Colonel, you see the price of glory.” Wilson himself 
later expressed his surprise that no one at the mission, or 
anywhere else along their route, had recognized the best- 
known man in the new republics. No doubt this was an 
unexpected lesson for the General as well, 

‘i am no longer myself,” he said. 

They spent the second night in an old tobacco factory 
that had been converted into lodgings for travelers near 
the village of Guaduas, where they were expected for a 
formal ceremony of regretful farewells which he refused 
to attend. The building was immense and gloomy, and its 
very location caused a peculiar malaise because of its un¬ 
tamed vegetation and the black precipitous waters of the 
river that hurtled in a thundering explosion down to the 
banana plantations in the hotbnds. The General knew 
the sp>t, and his first time there he had said: "If 1 had to 
ambush someone to assassinate him, this is the place 1 
would choose.” He had shunned it on other occasions 
only because it reminded him of Berruceos* a sinister 
stretch on the road to Quito that even the most fearless 


45 


travelers preferred to avoid. Once, against the judgment 
of all his men, he had made camp two leagues away be¬ 
cause he did not think he could bear so much sorrow. 
But this time, despite his fatigue and fever, it seemed in 
every wav more tolerable than the love feast of con- 

m * 

dolences his troubled friends in Guaduas had prepared 
for him. When rhe innkeeper saw him arrive in so griev¬ 
ous a state, he proposed sending for a local Indian who 
could cure a sick man, regardless of distance, and sight 
unseen, just by smelling a shirt he had sweated into. The 
General laughed at his credulity and forbade his men to 
attempt any kind of dealings with the miracle-working 
Indian, If he had no faith in doctors, whom he called 
traffickers in other people's pain, he could nor he ex¬ 
pected to entrust his fate to a backwater spiritualist. And 
then, as further affirmation of his contempt for medical 
science, he refused the decent bedroom they had pre¬ 
pared for him because it was the one most appropriate 
for the state of his health, and he ordered his hammock 
hung in the broad open gallery that faced the ravine, 
w here he would be exposed to the dangers of the night air- 
Nothing had passed his lips that day except the infusion 
he drank at dawn, but he joined his officers at the table 
only for the sake of courtesy. Although he adapted betrer 
than anyone to the rigors of life in the field, and was 
almost ascetic in his eating and drinking, he knew and 
appreciated the arts of rhe wine cellar and the kitchen 
as if he were a refined European, and beginning w ith his 
first trip abroad he had learned from the French the cus¬ 
tom of talking about food w hile he ate. I hat night he 
drank only half a glass of red wine and tasted the venison 
stew out of curiosity, to sec if what the innkeeper claimed 



The General in His Labyrinth 


and ins officers confirmed was true: that the phosphores¬ 
cent meat had the flavor of jasmines. He said no more 
than two sentences during the mcaL and he did not say 
them with any more animation than the very few he had 
said during the journey, but they all held in high esteem 
his effort to sweeten the vinegar of his public misfor¬ 
tunes and poor health with a spoonful of good manners, 
A man who could not overcome the bitter gall of a grudge 
for years after the offense, he had not said another word 
about politics or alluded to any of Saturday’s events. 

Before they finished eating he asked to be excused, and 
shivering with fever, he put on his nightshirt and sleeping 
cap and collapsed into his hammock. The night was cool, 
and an enormous orange moon was beginning to rise be* 
tween the hills, but he was in no frame of mind to look 
at it. Trie soldiers of his escort began to sing popular 
songs a few steps from the gallery, Following a standing 
order of his, they always encamped close to where he 
slept, like the legions of Julius Caesar* so he could learn 
from their conversations at night what they were think¬ 
ing and feeling. 1 I is insomniac's wanderings had often 
taken him to where they slept in the field, and not a few' 
dawns had found him and the soldiers singing barracks 
songs with the stanzas of praise or mockery they impro¬ 
vised in the heat of the fiesta. Bur that night he could not 
tolerate their singing, and he ordered them to be still. The 
eternal crashing of the river among the rocks was mag¬ 
nified by his fever and became part of his delirium. 

"The fucking water!' 1 he shouted. “If we could just 
stop it for a minute!” 

Bur no: he could no longer stop the flow of rivers, 
Jose Palacios tried to calm him with one of the many 


47 


palliatives they carried in the chest of medicines, but he 
refused it. \ hat was the first time he was heard to say 
his recurrent phrase: *Tvc just renounced power because 
of an emetic that should nor have been prescribed, and 
I’m not prepared to renounce life as well" Years before, 
he had said the same thing, when another physician cured 
him of tertian fever with an arsenical mixture that almost 
killed him with dysentery. From that time on T the only 
medicines he accepted were the purgative pills he cook 
without hesitation several times a week for his persistent 
constipation, and a senna enema for the most critical 
bouts of sluggishness. A short while after midnight, ex¬ 
hausted by his masters delirium, Jose Palacios stretched 
out on the bare brick floor and fell asleep. When he 
awoke, the General was not in his hammock, and his 
nightshirt, drenched with perspiration, lay on the floor. 
This was nothing out of the ordinary. W hen there was 
no one else in the house he would leave his bed and wan¬ 
der naked until dawn, whiling away his insomnia. But 
that night there were more reasons than usual to fear for 
him: he had been ill all day, and the cool, damp weather 
was not the most propitious for his walking about un¬ 
clothed. Jose Palacios took a blanket and looked for him 
in the house that was lit by a lunar green, and he found 
him lying like a funerary sratue on a stone bench built 
into the corridor walk The General turned to him with 
a lucid gaze in which no trace of fever remained, 

“This is another night like the one in San Juan dc 
Payara," he said. “W ithout Queen Maria Luisa, sad to 
say/’ 

Jose Palacios understood the allusion all too well. It 
referred to a January night in the year 1820 when the 


The General in His Labyrinth 


General and two thousand troops had come to a remote 
spot on the upland plateaus of the Apure in Venezuela. 
He had already liberated eighteen provinces from Span¬ 
ish domination. He had created the Republic of Colom¬ 
bia out of the former territories of the Viceregency of 
New Granada, the Captaincy General of Venezuela, and 
the Presidency of Quito, and he was at the same time its 
first president and the commander in chief of its armies. 
Hjs ultimate hope was to extend the war into the south 
in order to realize the fantastic dream of creating the 
largest country in the world: one nation, free and unified, 
from Mexico to Cape Horn. 

Nevertheless, his military situation that night was not 
the most favorable fur dreaming. A sudden plague that 
struck down the animals in midstride had left behind 
a pestilential trail fourteen leagues long of dead horses 
on the Llano plain* Many demoralized officers consoled 
themselves with rapine and reveled m their disobedience, 
and some even laughed when he threatened to have the 
guilty shot. Two thousand ragged and barefoot soldiers 
without weapons, without food, without blankets to defy 
the bleak upland plains, weary of wars and disease, had 
begun to desert in droves. For lack of a rational solution, 
he had ordered a reward of ten pesos for any patrol that 
captured and turned in a deserter, who would be shot 
with no questions asked. 

Life had already given him sufficient reasons for know¬ 
ing that no defeat was the final one. Less than two years 
before, when he was lost with his troops in the not too 
distant jungles of the Orinoco, he had been obliged to 
give orders to eat the horses for fear the soldiers would 
eat each other. At that time, according to the testimony 


49 


of an officer in the British Legion, he had the outlandish 
appearance of an exotic vagabond guerrilla. He wore the 
helmet of a Russian dragoon, a mule driver's es pad ri lies, 
a blue tunic with red trim and gold buttons, and he car¬ 
ried the black banner of a privateer hoisted on a plains¬ 
man’s lance, the skull and crossbones superimposed on a 
motto in letters of blood: ‘ Liberty or death.” 

On the night in San Juan de Payara his costume was 
less disreputable, but his situation was no better. And this 
reflected not only the momentary condition of his troops 
but the entire drama of the liberating army, which often 
reemerged triumphant from the worst defeats and was 
nevertheless about to collapse under the weight of its many 
victories. On the other hand, the Spanish genera! Don 
Pablo Morillo, with all the resources to crush the patriots 
and restore the colonial order, still controlled large areas 
of western Venezuela and was entrenched in the moun¬ 
tains. 

Faced with this state of the world, the General tended 
to his insomnia by walking naked through the deserted 
rooms of the old hacienda mansion, which was trans¬ 
figured by brilliant moonlight. Most of the horses that died 
the day before had been burned at a good distance from 

the house, but the stench of decay was still intolerable, 

* 

The troops had nor sung again after the death-ridden 
marches of the past week, and even he felt incapable of 
preventing the sentries from falling asleep with hunger. 
Then all at once, at the end of a gallery open to the vast 
blue plains, he saw Queen Maria Luisa sirring on the 
floor. A beautiful mularta in the flower of her youth and 
with the profile of an idol, she was wrapped in a flover- 
embroidered shawl that reached down to her leer and 


The General m His Labyrinth 

was smoking a tong cigar, i he sight of him frightened 
her, and she made a cross with her index finger and thumb 
and pointed it in his direction, 

“Whether you come from God or the devil/’ she said, 
“what do you want? " 

“You/ 1 he said. 

He smiled, and she was to remember the flash of 
his teeth in the moonlight. He embraced her with ail 
his strength, holding her so she could not move while he 
nibbled with soft kisses at her forehead, her eyes, her 
cheeks, her neck, until he had quieted her. 1 hen he 
removed the shawl, and it took his breath away. She too 
was naked, for her grandmother, who slept in the same 
room, took her clothes to keep her from going out to 
smoke, not realizing that at dawn she would escape 
wrapped in the shawl. 1 he General carried her to the 
hammock, giving her no respite from his soothing kisses, 
and she gave herself to him not out of desire or love but 
out of fear. She was a virgin. Only after she regained her 
courage did she say: 

'Tm a slave, sir.” 

"Not anymore," he said. “Love has made you free. ' 
In the morning he bought her from the owner of the 
hacienda for one hundred pesos taken from his impover¬ 
ished treasury and granted her unconditional freedom. 
Before he left he could not resist the temptation of pre¬ 
senting her with a public dilemma. He was in the back 
patio of the house with a group of officers who sat any 
way they could on the backs of pack animals, the only 
survivors of the slaughter. Another body of troops, under 
the command of Brigadier General Jose Antonio Paez, 


5 1 


who had arrived the night before, was assembled to see 
them off. 

The General gave a brief farewell speech in which he 
underplayed the drama of the situation, and he was pre¬ 
paring to leave when he saw Queen Maria Luisa in her 
new condition as a free and well-wooed woman. She had 
just bathed, and under the Llano sky she looked beauti¬ 
ful and radiant, dressed all in starched white with the lace 
petticoats and skimpy blouse of a slave woman. He asked 
her with good humor: 

“Are you staying or coming with us?" 

She answered with an enchanting smile: 

‘Tm staying, sir." 

Unanimous laughter greeted her reply. The master of 
the house, a Spaniard who was an early convert to the 
cause of independence and an old acquaintance, was help¬ 
less with laughter as he tossed him the little leather purse 
with the hundred pesos. He caught it in midair. 

"Keep them for the cause. Excellency, the Spaniard 
said, “The girl is free in any case.” 

General lose Antonio Paez, whose faunlike expression 
harmonized with his shirt patched in many colors, burst 
into expansive laughter. 

“Now you see, General," he said. “This is what we get 
for acting like liberators.” 

He assented to what they said and took his leave of 
everyone with a wide circle of his hand. Then he said a 
sportsmanlike goodbye to Queen Maria Luisa, and that 
was the last he heard of her. As far as Jose Palacios could 
remember, before a year of full moons had gone by. the 
General claimed he was reliving that night, without the 


The General in His Labyrinth 


miraculous appearance of Queen Maria Luisa, sad to say. 
And always on a night of defeat. 

At five o'clock, when Jose Palacios brought him his 
first tisane, he found him resting with his eyes open. But 
the General tried to stand up with such force that he al¬ 
most felt on his face and suffered a severe attack of cough¬ 
ing. I Ic sat on the hammock, holding his head in his hands 
and coughing until the crisis passed. Then he began to 
drink the steaming infusion, and his humor improved with 
rhe first sip. 

“I was dreaming about Cassandro all night," he said. 

It was his secret name for the New Granadan, General 
Francisco de Paula Santander, who had been his great 
friend at one rime and his greatest gainsayer of all time, 
his chief of staff from the very beginning of rhe war and 
the man he appointed President of Colombia during the 
cruel campaigns for the liberation of Quito and Peru and 
the founding of Bolivia. More for reasons of historical 
necessity than of vocation, Santander was an effective 
and brave soldier, with a rare fondness for cruelty, but 
his civic virtues and his excellent academic training were 
the mainstays of his glory. He was without a doubt the 
second man in rhe movement for independence and rhe 
first in rhe legal codification of the Republic, on which 
he imprinted forever the stamp of his formalist, conserva¬ 
tive spirit. 

On one of the many occasions when the General 
planned to resign, he had said to Santander that he was 
abandoning the presidency with confidence because “I 
am leaving you here, my other self, and perhaps my bet¬ 
ter self." I le had never, either by reasoned intention or 
bv force of circumstance, ptaced so much confidence in 


53 


any man. Ir was he who distinguished Santander with 
the title The Man of Law. Nevertheless, the person who 
had merited all i i is had been living in exile in Paris for 
the past two years because of his unproved complicity in 
a plot to assassinate the General. 

This is what happened. On September jj, 1828, at the 
stroke of midnight, twelve civilians and twenty-six sol¬ 
diers forced the great door of Government I louse in Santa 
Fe de Bogota, cut the throats of two of the President’s 
bloodhounds, wounded several sentries, slashed the arm 
of Captain Andres Ibarra with a saber, shot to death 
the Scotsman Colonel William Fcrgusson, a member of 
the British I .egion and an aide-de-camp to the President, 
who had called him as valiant as Caesar, and reached the 
presidential bedroom, shouting “Long live liberty!” and 
“Death to the tyrant! ” 

The rebels would justify the attempt by referring to 
the extraordinary powers of obvious dictatorial intent 
that rhe General had assumed three months before in 
order to thwart the Samanderisr victory at the Ocana 
Convention. The vice-presidency of the Republic, which 
Santander had occupied for seven years, was abolished. 
Santander told a friend about it in a sentence typical 
of his personal style: “I have had the pleasure of being 
buried under the ruins of the Constitution of 1821.” He 
was then thirty-six years old. He had been named Pleni¬ 
potentiary Minister to Washington but had postponed 
his departure several times, perhaps in anticipation of the 
conspiracy's success. 

The General and Manuela Saenz were just beginning 
a night of reconciliation. They had spent the weekend 
in the village of Soacha, two and a half leagues away. 


The General in His Labyrinth 


and had returned on Monday in separate coaches after a 
lovers' quarrel that was more virulent than usual because 
he remained deaf to her warnings of a plot to kill him, 
something everyone was talking about and only he re¬ 
fused to believe. She had not accepted the insistent mes¬ 
sages he sent to her house that night from San Carlos 
Palace across the street, but at nine o'clock, after three 
very urgent messages, she put waterproof boots over her 
shoes, covered her head with a shawl, and crossed the 
street flooded by rain. She found him floating face up 
in the fragrant waters of the bath, unattended by Jose 
Palacios, and if she did not believe he was dead it was 
because she had often seen him meditating in that state 
of grace. He recognized her footsteps and spoke without 
opening his eyes, 

“There is going to be an insurrection/' he said. 

Irony did not disguise her anger. 

^Congratulations/' she snid. “There could be ten, since 
you give such a cordial welcome to warnings/' 
u l only believe in portents/ 1 he said. 

He permitted himself the joke because his chief of 
staff, who had already told the conspirators the password 
for the night so they could deceive the palace guard, had 
given him his word that the conspiracy had failed. And 
therefore he was in good humor as he rose from the tub. 

“Don't worry/ 1 he said, "It seems the little fairies got 
cold feet." 

He was naked and she was half dressed, and they were 

m 

just beginning their love play in bed when they heard 
the first shouts, the first shots, and the cannons thunder¬ 
ing against loyal barracks. Manuda helped him to dress 
as quickly as possible, pur her waterproof boors on his 


55 


feet since the General had sent his only pan of boots to 
be polished, and helped him to escape out the balcony 
with a saber and a pistol but no protection against the 
eternal rain* As soon as he reached the street he pointed 
his cocked pistol at an approaching shadow: “Who goes 
there?" It was his steward returning home, grief-stricken 
by the news that they had killed his master* Resolved to 
share his fate to the end, Jose Palacios hid with him under 
Carmen Bridge in the brambles along the San Agostfn 
River unril loyal troops quelled the uprising* 

With the same shrewdness and courage she had already 
demonstrated during other historic emergencies, Manuel a 
Saenz received the attackers who forced the bedroom 
door. They asked for the President, and she replied that 
he was in the council room. They asked why the door to 
the balcony was open on a wintry night, and she said she 
had opened it to see what the noises were in the srreer. 
They asked why the bed w as warm, and she said she had 
lain down without undressing to wait for the President, 
As she played for rime with her parsimonious replies* she 
puffed great clouds of smoke from the cheapest kind of 
wagon driver's cigar to cover rhe fresh scent of cologne 
that still lingered in the room, 

V tribunal presided over by General Rafael Urdancra 
established that General Santander was the secret intel¬ 
ligence behind the conspiracy and condemned him to 
death. His enemies would say that the sentence was more 
than fair, not so much for Santander’s culpability in the 
assassination attempt as for his cynicism in being the first 
to appear in the main square to embrace and congratulate 
the President, who sat on horseback in the drizzling rain, 
without a shirt and with his runic ripped and soaked 


The General in His Labyrinth 


through, surrounded by the cheers of the troops and the 
common people who arrived en masse from the poor sub¬ 
urbs clamoring for the death of the assassins. “All the 
conspirators will be punished to some degree, 1 ' the Gen¬ 
eral said in a letter to Field Marshal Sucre. '‘Santander 
is the principal one, but also the most fortunate, because 
my generosity protects him.” And in fact, exercising his 
absolute powers, he commuted the death sentence to exile 
in Paris. On the other hand. Admiral Jose Prudcncio 
Padilla, imprisoned in Santa Fe de Bogota for a failed 
rebellion in Cartagena de Indias. was shot on insufficient 
evidence. 

Jose Palacios did not know when his master s dreams 
about Genera] Sanrander were real and w hen they were 
imaginary. Once, in Guayaquil, he said he dreamed about 
Santander’s holding an open book on his round belly, 
but instead of reading he tore out the pages and ate 
them one by one, raking great delight in chomping them 
with as much noise as if he were a goat. Another time, 
in Cucuta, he dreamed he saw him covered with cock¬ 
roaches. Another time, on the country estate of Monse- 
rrare in Santa Fe de Bogota, he woke up screaming be¬ 
cause he dreamed that while rhev were having lunch 
together General Santander plucked out his own eyeballs 
because they interfered w trh his eating and placed them 
on the table. And so at dawn near Guaduas, when the 
Genera! said he had dreamed once again about Santander, 
Jose Palacios did not even ask for the plot of the dream 
but tried instead to console him with reality. 

■p 

“There's a whole ocean between him and us,” he said. 

But the General cut him off with a sharp glance. 


57 


“Not anymore, 1 ' he said. *Tm certain that stupid bas¬ 
tard Joaquin JVlosquera will let him come back/' 

That thought had tormented him since his last return 
to the country, when his definitive renunciation of power 
presented itself as a question of honor. “I prefer exile or 
death to the dishonor of leaving my glory in the hands of 
the Academy of San Bartolome/ 1 he had said to Jose 
Palacios. Nevertheless, the antidote contained its own 
poison, for the closer he came to the final decision, the 
more certain he grew that as soon as he was gone. Gen¬ 
eral Santander, the most eminent graduate of that den 
of quibbling lawyers, would be called home from exile, 
! hat one s really a slippery bastard/' he said. 

I le had no trace of fever, and he felt so strong he 
asked Jose Palacios for pen and paper, put on his spec¬ 
tacles, and wrote six lines to Manuels Saenz in his own 
hand. This was bound to seem strange even to someone 
who was as accustomed as Jose Palacios to his impulsive 
actions, and could be understood only as a portent or an 
attack of unendurable inspiration. For it not only contra¬ 
dicted his decision on the previous Friday never to write 
another letter for the rest of his life, but it was also 
contrary to his custom of waking his secretaries at any 
hour to attend to back correspondence, or to dictate a 
proclamation, or to put in order the ideas that occurred 
to him in the ruminations of his insomnia. It seemed even 
stranger since the letter was of no apparent urgency, ami 
he added only a rather cryptic sentence to his parting 
advice; “Be careful what you do, for if you’re not, your 
ruination w ill be the ruination of us both. 11 He wrote it 
in his slapdash w ay, as if he had given it no thought, and 


The General in His Labyrinth 


when he finished he continued to sway in his hammock, 
engrossed, holding the letter in his hand* 

“There is great power in the irresistible force of love/' 
he sighed without warning. “Who said that?' 1 
“Nobody/ 1 said Jose Palacios* 

He did not know how to read or write, and he had 
refused to learn, with the simple argument that there was 
no greater wisdom than a donkeyV But on the other 
hand, he could remember any sentence he had ever heard, 
and he did not remember that one. 

“Then I said it myself/ 1 said the General, “but let s say 
it was Field Marshal Sucre." 

No one was better suited than Fernando for those times 
of crisis. He was the most w illing and patient of the Gen¬ 
eral's many clerks, although not the most brilliant, and he 
bore with stoicism the arbitrariness of his schedule or the 

irritability of his insomnia, The General would wake 

■* 

Fernando at any hour to have him read aloud from a dull 
book or take notes on urgent extemporizations, which 
ended in the trash the next morning* The General had 
fathered no children during his countless nights of love 
(although he said he had proofs he was not sterile), and 
cm the death of his brother he had taken charge of Fer¬ 
nando. He had sent him with outstanding letters of intro¬ 
duction to the Military Academy at Georgetown, where 
General Lafayette expressed the sentiments of admiration 
and respect his uncle inspired in him* Later he attended 
the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, He was not 
the successor the General perhaps had dreamed of, for 
academic subjects bored him, and he was delighted to 
exchange them for life in the open air and the sedentary 
arts of gardening. When he completed his studies the 


59 


General called him back ro Santa Fe dc Bogota and soon 
discovered his virtues as a secretary, not only because of 
his beautiful handwriting and his command of spoken and 
written English, but also because he was unique in his 
ability to invent the kinds of devices used in serialized 
novels to keep the reader in suspense, and when he read 
aloud he would improvise audacious episodes to add spice 
to soporific paragraphs. Like everyone in the service of 
the General, Fernando had suffered his moment of mis¬ 
fortune. when he attributed to Cicero a sentence bv Dc- 
mosthcncs rhat his uncle later cited in a speech. He was 
more severe with his nephew than with the others, since 
he was who he was, but he pardoned him before he had 
completed his punishment. 

Colonel Joaquin Posada Gutierrez, the governor of the 
province, had ridden our two days ahead of the traveling 
party, to announce their arrival in the towns where they 
would spend the night and to caution the authorities re¬ 
garding the serious state of the General's health. But those 
who saw him arrive in Guaduas on Monday afternoon 
accepted as true the persistent rumor that the Governor s 
reports, and even rhe journey itself, were nothing more 
than a political ruse. 

The General was invincible once more. He rode into 
town on the main street, his shirt unbuttoned and a Gypsy 
bandanna tied around his head to absorb the perspiration, 
waving his hat amid the cheers and the fireworks and 
the church bell that drowned nut the music, sitting tm a 
nimble-footed mule that once and far all stripped the 
parade of any pretension to solemnity* The only house 
where the windows stayed closed was the nuns' academy, 

w * 

and in the afternoon the rumor would fly that they had 


The General in His Labyrinth 


forbidden the girls to participate in the welcome, but he 

advised those who told him the storv not to believe con- 

& 

vent gossip. 

On the previous night Jose Palacios had given the shirt 
the General wore when he sweat out his fever to an or¬ 
derly for laundering. He in turn gave it to the soldiers 
who went down to the river at dawn to wash clothes, 
but when it was time to leave, no one knew anything 
about it. During the trip to Guaduas, and even while the 
fiesta was going on, Jose Palacios had succeeded in es¬ 
tablishing that the innkeeper had taken the unwashed 
shirt so that the miracle-working Indian could demon¬ 
strate his powers. And when the General returned, Jose 
Palacios informed him of the innkeeper’s breach of faith, 
reminding him that he had no shirrs other rhan the one he 
was wearing. He took the news with a certain philosophi¬ 
cal resignation. 

"Superstitions are harder to uproot rhan love." he said. 

"The strange thing is wc haven't had a fever since last 
night," said Jose Palacios. “U’hat if the witch doctor is 
a real magician?” 

He found no immediate reply, and he allowed himself 
to be carried away by deep reflection as he swayed in 
the hammock to the rhythm of his thoughts. “'I lie truth 
is 1 haven't had another headache," he said. “My mouth 
doesn’t tasre bitter, and 1 don’t feel as if I were about to 
fall off a tower.” But in the end he slapped his knees and 
sat up with a resolute movement. 

'Don’t put any more confusion in my head." he said. 

Two servants carried a large pot of boiling w ater w ith 
aromatic leaves into the bedroom, and jose Palacios pre- 


6i 


pared the evening bath, confident the General would 
soon go to bed because of his weariness after a day of 
traveling. But the bath grew cold while he dictated a 
letter to Gabriel Camacho, the husband of his niece Val¬ 
entina Palacios, and his agent in Caracas for the sale of the 
Aroa Mines, a copper deposit he had inherited from his 
parents. Even he did not seem to have a clear idea of his 
destination, for in one sentence he said he was going to 
Curasao svhile Camacho brought this piece of business 
to a successful conclusion, and in another he asked that 
he write to him in London in care of Sir Robert W ilson, 
with a copy for Mr. Maxwell Hyslop in Jamaica, to be 
sure he received one of the letters even if the other was 
lost. 

For many people, above all his secretaries and copyists, 
the Aroa Mines were another of his feverish ravings. He 
had shown so little interest in them that for years they 
had been worked by casual operators. He remembered 
the mines toward the end of his life when money began 
to grow scarce, but he could not sell them to an English 
company because his titles were not clear. That was the 
beginning of a legendary legal imbroglio that would go 
on for two years after his death. In the midst of wars, 
political conflicts, personal hatreds, everyone knew what 
lie meant when the General said "my case." In his opin¬ 
ion the Aroa Mines were the only case. The letter he 
dictated in Guaduas to Don Gabriel Camacho left his 
nephew with the mistaken impression that they would 
not leave for Europe until the dispute was settled, and 
Fernando mentioned this later when he was playing cards 
with the other officers. 


The General in His Labyrinth 


“Then we will never leave.’’ said Colonel W ilson, 
“My father has reached the point where he wonders if 
that copper exists in the real world." 

“The fact that no one's seen them doesn’t mean the 
mines don’t exist." replied Captain Andres Ibarra. 

“They exist," said General Carrcno. “In the Depart¬ 
ment of Venezuela." 

W ilson replied in disgust: 

“At this stage I even wonder if Venezuela exists." 

He could not hide his vexation. H i Ison had come to 
believe the General was not fond of him and kept him 
in his entourage only out of consideration for his father, 
to whom he was forever grateful for his defense of Ameri¬ 
can emancipation in the F.nglish Parliament. Through 
the disloyalty of a former aide-de-camp, a Frenchman, 
he learned that the General had said: “Wilson needs to 
spend some time in the school of difficulties, not to men¬ 
tion adversity and misery." Colonel Wilson had not been 
able to determine if that was in fact what the General 
had said, bur in any case he believed that just one of his 
battles would qualify him as a graduare of all three 
schools. He xvas twenty-six years old, and eight years 
earlier, when he finished his studies at Westminster and 
Sandhurst, his father had sent him to serve the General. 
He had been his aide-de-camp at the battle of Junin. and 
he was the man who carried the first draft of the Bolivian 
Constitution on muleback from Chuquisaca to La Paz 
along three hundred sixty leagues of narrow precipice. 
U'hen he said goodbye the General told him he had to 
be in La Paz in twenty-one days at t he latest. Wilson 

■ m 

snapped to attention: ‘Til be there in twenty, Excel¬ 
lency/ It took him nineteen* 

m 


6j 


He had decided to return to Europe with the General, 
but each day increased his certainty that he would always 
find another reason for deferring the trip. His mention of 
the Aroa Mines after more than two years of not even 
using them as a pretext for anything was a disheartening 
sign for Wilson. 

lose Palacios reheated the water after the letter had 
been dictated, but the (ieneral did not take a bath and 
continued his aimless walking, declaiming poetry in a 
voice that resounded throughout the house. He went on 
to poems he had written that only Jose Palacios knew 
about. Several times he passed the gallery where his of¬ 
ficers were playing ropilla , the American name for Ga¬ 
lician lansquenet, which he too had once played. He 
would stop for a moment to watch over each officer's 
shoulder, draw conclusions regarding their progress, and 
continue walking. 

"I don’t know how you can waste your time on such a 
boring game,” he said. 

Nevertheless, on one of his many turns around the 

w 

house he could not resisr the temptation of asking Captain 
Ibarra to allow him to take his place at the table, I Ic did 
not possess the patience good gamblers have, he was ag¬ 
gressive and a poor loser, but he was also astute and fast 
and knew how to put himself on equal footing with his 
subordinates. On that occasion, with General Carreho 
as his partner, he played six games and lost all of them. 
He threw the cards on the table. 

“This game is shit/ he said. "Who’s brave enough to 
try ombre? M 

They all were. He won three games in a row, his humor 
improved, and he tried to ridicule the way Colonel \\ il- 


The General in His Labyrinth 


son played. Wilson took it well but made use of the Gen- 
eral’s enthusiasm to gam an advantage, and he did not 
lose again. The General became tense, his lips hardened 
and turned pale, and the eyes set deep under bushy eye¬ 
brows burned with the savage brilliance of other rimes. 
He did not speak again, and a pernicious cough interfered 
with his concentration- It was past twelve o clock when 
he stopped the game. 

“'I lie wind's been blowing on me all night/’ he said. 
They carried the table to a more sheltered spot, but 
he continued losing. He asked them ro tjuiet the fifes that 
could be heard playing at some nearby fiesta, but the 
fifes continued to sound over the din of the crickets. He 
changed his seat, he put a pillow on his chair so he could 
sit higher and be more comfortable, he drank an infusion 
of linden blossoms to relieve his cough, he played several 
games while walking from one end of the gallery to the 
other, but he continued losing, Wilson kept his clear, 
embittered eyes on him, but he did not deign to look 
back. 

"This deck is marked/’ he said, 

“The deck is yours, General/ 1 said Wilson- 
It was in fact one of his, but still he examined it card 
by card, and at last he had it changed. Wilson gave him 
no rest. The crickets stopped, there was a long silence 
shaken bv a humid breeze that brought the first scent of 
the burning valleys to the gallery, and a rooster crowed 
three times. “That rooster’s crazy/ 1 said Ibarra. "It can't 

w 

be later than two o'clock/' Without raking his eyes off 
the cards, the General ordered in a surly voice: 
"Nobody moves from here, damn it/ 1 
No one breathed. General Carreno, w ho was follow'- 


65 


ing the game with more apprehension than interest, re¬ 
membered the longest night of his life, two years before, 
when they were waiting in Bucaramanga for the results 
of the Ocana Convention. They had begun to play at nine 
o'clock and did not finish until eleven the next morning, 
when his companions agreed to let rhe General win three 
games in a row. Fearing another rest of endurance that 
night in Guaduas, General Carreno signaled Colonel Wil¬ 
son to begin to lose. Wilson ignored him. I hen, when 
he asked for a five-minute break. General Carreno fol¬ 
lowed him along the terrace and found him pissing his 
ammoniacal bitterness into the pots of geraniums, 

“Colonel Wilson," General Carreno ordered. “Atten¬ 
tion!” 

Wilson replied without turning his head: 

“Wait until I finish." 

He finished with absolute serenity and turned around 
as he adjusted his trousers. 

“Begin to lose,” General Carreno told him, "if only as 
an act of kindness to a friend in trouble." 

“I refuse to pay anyone such an insult," said Wilson 
with a touch of irony. 

“That's an order!" said Carreno. 

Wilson, standing at attention, looked down at him 
from his full height with imperial contempt. Then he 
returned to the tabic and began to lose. ! he General 
understood. 

“It isn't necessary for you to do it so badly, my dear 
Wilson,” he said. “When all is said and done, it’s time 
we went to sleep.” 

He took his leave of everyone with a firm handshake, 
as he always did when he got up from the card table, in 


The General in His Labyrinth 


order to show that the game had not altered his feelings, 
and he returned to the bedroom. Jose Palacios had fallen 
asleep on the floor, but he stood up when he saw him 
come in* The General stripped off all his clothes in a 
rush and began to sway in his hammock, his thoughts 
in a whirl, his respiration growing louder and harsher the 
more he thought. When he sank into the tub he was 
shaking down to the marrow of his bones, but this time 
it was not fever or cold, but rage, 

“Wilson’s a slippery bastard/' he said* 

It was one of his worst nights, Jose Palacios disobeyed 
orders and warned the officers in case it proved necessary 
to call a doctor, and he kept him wrapped in sheets so 
he could sweat out the fever. He soaked through several 
of them, with momentary respites chat only hurled him 

back into hallucinatory crises Several times he shouted: 

* 

“Make those damn fifes be quiet!" But no one could help 
him this time, because the fifes had been silent since mid¬ 
night. Later he discovered who was responsible for his 
prostration. 

“I was feeling fine," he said, “until I let all of you talk 
me into that fucking Indian with the shirt." 

The iasr stage of the journey to Honda was along a 
heartstopping precipice through air like molten glass that 
only physical stamina and willpower like his could have 
endured afrer a night of agony. After the first few leagues 
he had moved back from his usual position to ride beside 
Colonel Wilson, who knew to interpret the gesture as an 
invitation to forget the grievances of the gaming table 
and who offered his arm, as if he were a falconer, tor the 
General to rest his hand on. In that wav they made the 
descent together. Colonel Wilson moved by his courtesy 


6 ? 


and the General using his last strength to struggle for 
breath but sitting unbowed in the saddle. When the steep¬ 
est stretch was over he asked with a voice from another 
century; 

“What do you suppose London is like now? M 

Colonel Wilson looked at the sun, which was almost 
in the center of the sky, and said; 

“V ery bad. General/' 

He showed no surprise but asked another question in 
the same voice; 

“And why is that?" 

“Because there it's six in the evening, the worst time in 
London/ 1 said Wilson. “And a rain as filthy and dead as 
toad water must be falling, because spring is our sinister 
season/' 

“Don't tell me you’ve conquered nostalgia/' he said. 

"On the contrary: nostalgia has conquered me/' said 
Wilson. "1 no longer put up the slightest resistance to it/" 

“Then do you or don’t you want to go back?’ 1 

“I don’t know anything anymore. General,” said Wil¬ 
son. *Tm at the mercy of a destiny that isn’t mine/’ 

The General looked straight into his eyes and said in 
amazement: 

"That s what I should be saying/ 1 

When he spoke again, his voice and mood had changed. 
“Don’t worry/ 1 he said. “Whatever happens, we will go 
to Europe, if for no other reason than to not deprive your 
father of rhe pleasure of seeing you/’ Then, after long 
reflection, he concluded; 

“And let me tell you one last thing, my dear Wilson: 
they can call you anything they like except a slippery 
bastard.” 


The General in His Labyrinth 


Accustomed to his gallant repentances, above all after 
a stormy card game or a victory in battle. Colonel Wilson 
yielded to him one more time. He continued to ride at 
a slow pace with the feverish hand of the most glorious 
invalid in the Americas clutching like a hunting falcon at 
his forearm, while the air began to boil and funereal birds 
circling above their heads had to be driven away like flies. 

On the most difficult part of the slope they crossed 
paths with a crew of Indians carrying a party of Euro¬ 
pean travelers in sedan chairs. Then, when they had almost 
completed the descent, a demented horseman passed them 
at full gallop, riding in the same direction they were tak¬ 
ing. He wore a red hood that almost covered his face, and 
his haste was so disordered that Captain Ibarra's mule al 
most plunged over the edge in fright. The General just 
had time to shout "Watch where you're going, damn 
you!” He stared after him until he disappeared around 
the first bend but was still watching for him each time he 
reappeared on the lower curves of the precipice. 

At two o'clock in the afternoon they rode the crest of 
the last hill, and the horizon opened into a brilliant plain 
at the end of which the celebrated city of Honda lay 
dozing, with its bridge of Castilian stone spanning the 
great marshy river, with its walls in ruins and its church 
tower destroyed by an earthquake. The General contem¬ 
plated the burning valley but betrayed no emotion except 
when he saw the rider in the red hood crossing the bridge 
at his unending gallop. Then the light he had seen in his 
dreams was rekindled. 

“Merciful God," he said. “The only explanation for 
that kind of speed is thar he’s carrying a letter for Cas- 
sandro with the news that we’ve left.” 


DESPITE the warning against any public demonstra¬ 
tions to mark his arrival, a high-spirited troop of horse¬ 
men rode out to welcome him in the port, and Governor 
Posada Gutierrez arranged three days of bands and fire¬ 
works, But rain ruined the fiesta before they even reached 
the streets of the commercial district. It was an inoppor¬ 
tune downpour of devastating violence, which tore up 
the cobbles in the streets and sent water flooding through 
the poor neighborhoods, but the heat remained imper¬ 
turbable. In the welter of greetings someone repeated the 
eternal cliche: "It’s so hot here the hens lay fried eggs.” 
For the next three days this same disaster was repeated 
without anv variation. During the torpor of siesta a black 
cloud descended from the mountains, settled over the 
city, and burst open in an instant deluge. Then the sun 
shone again in a diaphanous sky, as merciless as before, 
while the civic brigades cleared the streets of the debris 
left by the flood, and the next day’s black cloud began to 
form on the crests of the hills. At any hour of the day or 
night, indoors or out, one heard the panting of the heat. 


The General in His Labyrinth 


Prostrate with fever, the General could scarcely en¬ 
dure the official welcoming ceremony- The air was at a 
rolling boil in the salon of the town hall, but he managed 
a sermon worthy of a cautious bishop, which he spoke 
very slowly in an unwilling voice without getting up 
from the armchair. A ten-year-old girl wearing angel 
wings and a dress of ruffled organza choked with haste 
as she recited from memory an ode to the glories of the 
General. But she made a mistake, began again at the 
wrong place, became lost beyond all hope, and not know¬ 
ing what else to do, stared at him in panic. 1 lie General 
gave her a smile of complicity and reminded her of the 
lines in a low voice: 

The brilliance of his saber 

is the living reflection of his glory. 

In the early years of his power, the General missed no 
opportunity to give splendid banquets for a multitude 
of guests, whom he would urge to eat and to drink to 
the point of inebriation. From that sumptuous past he 
still had his personal monogrammed place setting, which 
Jose Palacios would bring to dinner parries. At the recep¬ 
tion in Honda he agreed to sit in the place of honor, but 
he drank only a glass of port and just tasted the river turtle 
soup, which left an unpleasant flavor in his mouth. 

He withdrew early to the sanctuary Governor Posada 
Gutierrez had readied for him in his house, but the news 
that the mail from Santa Fe de Bogota was expected the 
next day drove away the little sleep that was left to him. 
Prey ro apprehension after the three-day respite, he be¬ 
gan to think again about his misfortunes, and again he 
tormented Jose Palacios with idle questions. He wanted 



7 1 


to know what had happened since he left, what the city 
would be like with a government different from his own, 
what life would be like without him. On one gloomy 
occasion he had said: t4 America is half a world gone 
mad/ 1 1 hat first night in Honda he had even more reason 
to believe this was so* 

He spent the night in suspense, plagued by mosquitoes 
because he refused to sleep with netting* At times he 
walked around and around the room talking to himself, at 
times he swayed w ith great lurching swings in the ham¬ 
mock, at times he rolled himself in a blanker and suc¬ 
cumbed to his fever, almost shouting with delirium in a 
marshland of sweat, Jose Palacios stayed with him, an¬ 
swering his questions, telling him the exact hour and 
minute every few seconds without having to consult 
the two watches he wore on chains fastened to the but¬ 
tonholes of his vest He rocked the hammock when the 
General did not have the strength to do it himself and 
drove away the mosquitoes with a cloth until at last he 
lulled him into a sleep that lasted over an hour. But he 
awoke with a start just before dawn when he heard the 
sound of animals and mens voices in the patio, and he 
went out in his nightshirt to receive the mail 

His young Mexican aide-de-camp. Captain AgUStm de 
Iturbide, who had been detained in Santa Fc de Bogota 
by a last-minute emergency, arrived with the mail car¬ 
riers. He had with him a letter from Held Marshal Sucre, 
a heartfelt lament at not having arrived in time to say 
goodbye. There also arrived in the mail a letter written 
two days earlier by President Gaycedo, Governor Posada 
< jutilnez came into the bedroom a short while later with 
clippings from the Sunday papers, and the General asked 


The General in His Labyrinth 


that he read the letters to him since the light was still too 
dim for his eyes. 

1 he news was that on Sunday the weather had cleared 
in Santa Fe dc Bogota, and numerous families with their 
children invaded the horse-breeding farms with baskets 
of roast suckling pig, baked brisket, blood sausage with 
rice, potatoes with melted cheese, and ate their lunch on 
the grass under a radiant sun that had not been seen in 
the city for ages. This May miracle had dissipated Satur¬ 
day’s tension. ! he students from the Academy of San 
Bartolomei had taken to the streets once more with the 
all too familiar farce of symbolic executions, but to no 
effect. They dispersed in boredom before nightfall, and 
on Sunday they exchanged rifles for treble guitars and 
could be seen on the breeding farms singing bjmhttcos 
among the crowds of people warming themselves in the 
sun, until it rained again without warning at five o'clock 
in the afternoon and the fiesta was over. 

Posada Gutierrez interrupted his reading of the letter. 

"Nothing in this world can stain your glory,” he said 
to the General. "No matter what they say, Your Excel¬ 
lency will continue to be the greatest Colombian any¬ 
where on earth.” 

"I don't doubt it,” said the General, "if all 1 had to do 
was leave to make the sun shine again,” 

The only item in Caycedo’s letter to provoke him was 
that even the Interim President of the Republic com¬ 
mitted the abuse of calling Santander's followers lib¬ 
eral!, as if it were official terminology. "I don’t know 
where the demagogues got the right to call themselves 
liberals,’’ he said. “Thev stole the word, pure and sim¬ 
ple, just as thev steal everything they lay their hands 


73 


on.’’ He leaped from the hammock and continued to 
vent his anger to the Governor as he paced off the room 
from one end to the other with his soldier's strides. 

! he truth is, the only two parties here are those who 
are with me and those who are against me, and you know 
that better than anyone, he concluded. “And although 
they may not believe it, no one is more liberal than I am." 

Later a personal emissary from the Governor brought 
him the verbal message that Manucla Saenz had not writ¬ 
ten to him because the mail carriers had categorical in¬ 
structions not to accept her letters. The message came 
from Manuela herself, who on the same date had sent 
the Interim President a letter to protest the prohibition, 
which was the origin of a series of mutual provocations 
that would end in her exile and oblivion. Nevertheless, 
contrary to the expectations of Posada Gutierrez, who 
had firsthand knowledge of the stormv quarrels in that 
tormented love affair, the General smiled at rhe bad 
news. 

These conflicts are the natural stare of my amiable 
madwoman,‘ lie said. 

Jose Palacios did not hide his vexation at the lack of 
consideration shown in the programming of the three 
days in Honda. The most surprising invitation was to 
visit rhe silver mines at Santa Ana, six leagues away, but 
more surprising was that the General accepted, and much 
more surprising was that he went down to a subterranean 
gallery. Even worse: on the way back, despite his high 
fever and a head about to explode with migraine, he went 
swimming in a backwater of the river. The days were 
long gone when he would wager that he could cross a 
rushing torrent on the plains with one hand tied and still 


The General in His Labyrinth 


beat the most skillfui swimmer. In any case, this time he 
swam for half an hour without tiring, but those who saw 
his scrawny ribs and rachitic legs did not understand how 
he staved alive with so little body. 

On the :ast night, the municipal government held a 
gala ball in his honor, which he declined to attend be¬ 
cause of fatigue after his excursion. Secluded in the bed¬ 
room with Fernando since five o’clock that afternoon, 
he dictated the reply to General Domingo Caycedo and 
had his nephew read aloud several more pages of Lima’s 
gallant adventures, in some of which he had been the 
protagonist. Then he took a lukewarm bath and lay mo¬ 
tionless in the hammock, listening to the strains of mu¬ 
sic wafting in from the ball in his honor. Jose Palacios 
thought he was asleep, when he heard him say: 

“Do vou remember that waltz?” 

w 

He whistled several measures to remind the steward 
of the music, but he could not identify it. “It was the 
waltz they played the night we arrived in Lima from 
Chuijuisaca.” said the General, Jose Palacios did not re¬ 
member it, but he would never forget the glorious night 
of February 8 , 1816 . 1 hat morning Lima had given them 
an imperial reception, and the General responded with 
a sentence he repeared without fail at every toast: “There 
is not a single Spaniard left in the vast territory of Peru." 
That day confirmed the independence of the huge con¬ 
tinent which he proposed to turn, according to his own 

words, into the most immense, or most extraordinary, 

* 

or most invincible league of nations the world had ever 
seen. For him the emotions of the fiesta were associated 
with the waltz he had asked them to repeat as many times 
as necessary so that every lady in Lima would have the 


75 


opportunity to dance to it with him. His officers, who 
wore the most dazzling uniforms the city had ever seen, 
did their hest to follow his example, for they all waltzed 
admirably—a memory that endured in the hcarrs of rheir 
partners much longer than any glories of war. 

< 'n the last night in Honda they opened the fiesta with 
the victory waltz, and he waited in the hammock for 

i f 

them to repeat it* But when it was clear they w ould not* 
he leaped up, pur on the same riding clothes he had w orn 
on the excursion to the mines, and presented himself at 
the ball without being announced, I le danced for almost 
three hours and had them repeat the piece each time he 
changed partners, attempting perhaps to reconstitute the 
splendor of long ago out of the ashes of his memories* 
Gone were the years of illusion when everyone dropped 
with exhaustion and only he and his last partner were 
left to dance until dawn in the deserted ballroom. Danc¬ 
ing was for him so dominant a passion that he would 
dance without a partner when one was not at hand, or he 
would dance alone to music he whistled himself, and he 
would express his moments of great jubilation by danc¬ 
ing on the dining room table, On the last night in Honda 
his strength w as so diminished that during intermissions 
he had to inhale the fumes from the handkerchief soaked 
with cologne in order to revive, but he danced with so 
much enthusiasm and such youthful skill rhat without 
intending to, he confounded the talcs of his fatal illness. 
Nor long after midnight, when he returned to the 
house, they reported that a woman was waiting for him 
in the reception room. Elegant and haughty, emitting the 
fragrance of spring, she wore a long-sleeved velvet dress, 
riding boots of the finest cordovan leather, and the silk- 


The General in His Labyrinth 

veiled hat of a medieval lady. 3 he General made her a 
formal bow, intrigued by the nature and hour of the visit. 
Without saying 3 word she held up a reliquary hanging 
around her neck on a long chain, and he recognized it in 
astonishment. 

"Miranda Lyndsay!" he said, 

“It's me/ she said, ‘‘although I'm no longer the same/' 

i he grave, warm voice like a cello, rippled by iust 
the slightest trace of her native English, must have awak¬ 
ened unrepeatable memories in him. With a wave of his 
hand he dismissed the sentry standing guard at the door, 
and he sat down facing her, so close their knees almost 
touched, and took both her hands in his. 

They had met fifteen years earlier in Kingston, during 
his second exile, at an informal luncheon in the home of 
the English merchant Maxwell Hyslop. She was the only 
child of Sir London Lyndsay, an English diplomat who 
had retired to a sugar plantation in Jamaica to write the 
six volumes of memoirs that nobody read. Despite the 
unquestionable beauty of Miranda and the susceptible 
heart of the young exile, at that time he was too immersed 
in his dreams and too involved with another woman to 
notice anyone else. 

She w ould always remember him as a bony, pale man 
who seemed much older than his thirty-two years, who 
had the coarse sideburns and mustache of a mulatto and 
hair that hung down to his shoulders. Like all the young 
men of the native aristocracy, he was dressed in the Eng¬ 
lish style: a white cravat, a facker too heavy for the di¬ 
ms re, and the Romantics gardenia in his lapel. Dressed 
in this fashion on a libertine night in i8ro, he was mb- 


77 


taken by a gallant whore in a London brothel for a Greek 
pederast. 

For better or worse, what was most memorable about 
him were his dazzling eyes and his endless, exhausting 
talk in the strident voice of a bird of prey. Strangest of 
all, he kept his eyes lowered and held rhe attention of his 
table companions without looking straight at them. He 
spoke with the cadence and diction of the Canary Islands 
and in the educated forms of Madrid, which he alternated 
that day with an elementary but comprehensible English 
in honor of two guests who did not understand Spanish. 

During the luncheon he paid attention to no one except 
his own phantoms. He spoke without pause in an erudite, 
declamatory style, delivering raw prophetic sentences, 
many of which would appear in an epic proclamation 
published some days later in a Kingston newspaper, which 
history would consecrate as The Jamaica Letter. “It is 
not rhe Spaniards but otir own lack of unity that has 
brought us again to slavery,'' he said. Speaking of the 
greatness, the resources, and the talents of America, he 
repeated several times: “We are the human race in minia¬ 
ture.'’ \Vhen she returned home her father asked .Miranda 
about the conspirator who so disquieted Spanish agents 
on the island, and she summed him up in a single sentence: 
“He feels he’s Bonaparte." 

Some days later he received an unexpected message 
with detailed instructions for meeting her in a deserted 
spot, alone and on foot, the following Saturday night at 
nine o'clock. T! at challenge endangered not only his 
own life but rhe fate of the Americas as well, for at that 
time he was the last resort of a shattered insurrection. 


The General in His Labyrinth 


After five years of troubled independence, Spain had just 
reconquered the Viceregency of New Granada and the 
Captaincy General of Venezuela, territories that did not 
offer resistance to the ferocious onslaught of General 
Pablo Morillo, called i be Pacifier, The supreme com¬ 
mand of the patriots had been eliminated by the simple 
formula of hanging every man who could read and write. 

Of all the generation of enlightened Americans who 
sowed the seeds of independence from Mexico to Rio 
de la Plata, he was the most convinced, the most tena¬ 
cious, the most farseeing, the one who best reconciled 
the ingenuity of politics and the intuition of warfare. 
He lived in a rented two-bedroom house with his military 
aides, iwo adolescent former slaves who continued to 
serve him after their emancipation, and Jose Palat es. 
Going off at night, on foot and without an escort, to 
meet a stranger was a senseless risk and historical folly 
as well. But despite all the value he placed on his life ansi 
his cause, nothing tempted him more than the enigma of 
a beautiful woman, 

Miranda was waiting for him on horseback in the pre~ 
arranged place, she too was alone, and he sat behind her 
on the horse as she rode along an invisible path* Light¬ 
ning and thunder far out to sea threatened rain* A pack 
of dark-colored dogs, barking in the shadows, ran between 
the feet of the horse, but she kept them at bay with the 
soft words she whispered to them in English, iTiey passed 
very close to the sugar plantation where Sir London 
Lyndsay was writing the memories that no one but him 
would remember, they forded a rocky stream, and when 
they were on the other side they entered a pine forest 
at the end of which lay an abandoned hermitage. There 


79 


they dismounted, and she led him by the hand through 
the dark oratory to the ruined sacristy, dimly lit by a 
torch set in the wall and containing no other furniture 
but two rough-hewn logs. Only then did each see the 
other's face. He was in shirtsleeves, his hair was tied 
back at the nape of the neck in a pigtail, and Miranda 
found him more youthful and attractive than at the 
luncheon. 

He took no initiative, for his method of seduction did 
not follow a set pattern, but each case, above all the 
first move, was distinctive. “In the preambles to love no 
error can be rectified," he had said. On this occasion he 
must have been convinced that all obstacles had been 
surmounted ahead of time, since the decision had been 
hers. 

He was wrong. Along with her beauty Miranda pos¬ 
sessed a dignity difficult to ignore, so that a fair amount 
of time went by before he realized he had to take the 
initiative on this occasion too. She had invited him to sit 
down, and just as they were to do fifteen years later in 
Honda, they faced each other, sitting so dose on the 
rough-hewn trunks that their knees almost touched. He 
took her by the hands, pulled her toward him, and tried 
to kiss her. She allowed him to draw near until she felt 
the warmth of his breath, and then she moved her face 
away. 

“All in good time,” she said. 

The same words cut off his many subsequent attempts. 
At midnight, when rhe rain began to filter in through 
the cracks in the roof, they were still sitting opposite each 
other, holding hands while be recited a poem he had re¬ 
cently been composing in his mind. The lines were metri- 


The General in His Labyrinth 


cal, well-rhymed royal octaves combining the flattery of 
love and the bluster of war. She was moved, and she 
mentioned three names in an effort to guess the author. 

"It’s by a soldier.’ 1 he said. 

“A fighting soldier or a salon soldier?" she asked. 

"Both," he said. “T he greatest and most solitary sol¬ 
dier who ever lived.” 

She remembered what she had said to her father after 
Mr. Hyslop’s luncheon. 

‘‘That can only be Bonaparte,' she said, 

“Close," said the General, ‘ but the moral difference 
is enormous, because the author of the poem did not allow 
himself to be crowned." 

As the years passed and news of him reached her, she 
would ask herself with growing amazement if he had 
been aware that his clever sally was the prefiguration of 
his own life. But that night she did not even suspect it, 
involved as she was in rhe almost impossible task of hold¬ 
ing him off without offending him, of not giving in to the 
advances that grew more pressing as dawn approached. 
She went as far as allowing him a few casual kisses, but 
nothing more. 

“All in good time," she said to him. 

“At three o'clock this afternoon 1 am leaving forever 
on rhe packet boat to Haiti,” he said. 

She shattered his cunning with a charming laugh. 

“In the first place, rhe packet boat doesn’t leave until 
Friday, she said. “And besides, the cake you ordered 
yesterday from Scfiora T urner has to be brought to your 
supper tonight with the woman who hates me most in 
this world." 

The woman who hated her most in this world was 


8i 


named Julia Cobicr, a beautiful and wealthy Dominican 
who was also an exile in Jamaica and in whose house, they 
said, he had spent more than one night. That evening 
just the two of them were going to celebrate her birthday. 

“You’re better informed than my spies/' he said. 

“And w hy not assume instead that I am one of your 
spies?" she said. 

He did not understand her remark until six o'clock 
that morning, when he returned to his house and found 
the body of his friend Felix Ames toy, who had bled to 
death in the hammock where he would have been lying 
if it had not been for the counterfeit tryst. Sleep had over¬ 
come An estoy as he waited for the General's return in 
order to give him an urgent message, and one of the 
former slaves, paid by the Spaniards, stabbed him eleven 
times in the belief he was the General. .Miranda had 
learned of the planned assassination and could think of 
no more astute way to prevent ir. He attempted to thank 
her in person, but she did not respond to his messages. 
Before leaving for Puerto Principe in a corsair“s schooner, 
he sent Jose Palacios to her with the precious reliquary 
he had inherited from his mother, along with an unsigned 
note consisting of a single line: 

"I am condemned to a theatrical destiny/’ 

Miranda never forgot or understood that hermetic 
sentence of the young warrior who, in the years that 
followed, returned to his country with the help of Gen¬ 
eral Alexandre Potion, President of the Free Republic of 
Haiti, crossed the Andes with a mounted troop of bare¬ 
foot plainsmen, defeated the royalists at Boyaca Bridge, 
and for the second rime and forever liberated New Gra¬ 
nada, and then his native Venezuela, and at last the rugged 


The General in His Labyrinth 

southern territories all the way to their borders with the 
Empire of Brazil. She followed his career, above all 
through the tales of travelers who never wearied of re¬ 
counting his exploits. When the independence of the for¬ 
mer Spanish colonics was established, Miranda married 
an English surveyor who changed professions and settled 
in New Granada to plant Jamaican sugarcane in the 
I londa Valley, where she had been the day before svhen 
she heard that her old i riend, the Kingston exile, was only 
three leagues from her house. But she reached the mines 
when the General had already started on his way back 
to Honda, and she had to ride another half day to catch 
up with him. 

She would not have recognized him on the street with¬ 
out the sideburns and mustache of his youth, with his 
white thinning hair and that look of final turmoil w'hich 
gave her the terrifying impression she was talking to a 
dead man. Miranda had intended to raise her veil to speak 
with him once the danger of being recognized on the 
street was behind her, but she was held back by her 
horror that in her face he too would see the ravages of 
time. As soon as the preliminary courtesies were over, 
she went straight to the point: 

“Eve come to ask you a favor." 

"I am at your service," he said. 

“The father of my five children is serving a long prison 
term for killing a man,” she said. 

“With honor?” 

“In an open duel," she said, and hurried to explain: 
"Because of jealousy.” 

“Unfounded, of course," he said. 

"No, founded." she said. 


83 


But it was all in the past now, even him, and the only 
thing she asked for mercy’s sake was that he exercise his 
power to pot an end to her husband's imprisonment. All 
he could find to say was the truth: 

I am ill and destitute, as you can see, but there is noth¬ 
ing in this world I Wouldn't do for you." 

He had Captain Ibarra come in to take notes on the 
details of the case, and he promised to do everything in 
his waning power to obtain the pardon. Thar same night 
he exchanged ideas with Colonel Posada Gutierrez, in 
absolute confidence and with nothing in writing, but 
everything was held in abeyance until they knew what 
the new' government would be like. He accompanied 
Miranda to the portico of the house, where an escort of 
six emancipated slaves was w aiting for her, and he kissed 
her hand in farewell. 

"It was a happy night," she said. 

He could not resist the temptation: 

"This one or the other?" 

“Both," she said. 

She mounted a fresh horse, as handsome and welt 
outfitted as a viceroy’s, and she rode away at full gallop 
without a backward glance. He waited in the doorway 
until she was lost from view at the end of the street, but 
he was still seeing her in his dreams when Jose Palacios 
woke him at dawn for the start of their river journey. 

Seven years before, he had granted special rights to a 
German, Commodore Johann B. Elbcrs, to initiate steam 
navigation. He himself had traveled in one of the vessels 
from Barranca Nueva to Puerto Real by way of Ocana, 
and he had recognized it as a comfortable and safe form 
of transportation. Nevertheless, Commodore Libers be- 


The General in His Labyrinth 


lieved the business was not worth the effort if not backed 
by exclusive rights, and General Santander granted them 
without conditions when he occupied the presidency. 
Two years later, invested with absolute powers by the 
National Congress, the General broke the agreement with 
one of his prophetic statements: “If we leave the mo¬ 
nopoly in the hands of the Gentians, they will end up 
transferring it to the United States/' Then he declared 
total freedom of river navigation throughout the coun¬ 
try. And therefore when he attempted to obtain a steam¬ 
ship in the event he decided to make the journey, he 
encountered delays and circumlocutions that bore too 
dose a resemblance to revenge, and when it was time to 
leave he had to settle for the traditional barees. 

o 

Since five o'clock that morning the port had been full 
of people on horseback and on foot, recruited by the 
Governor in great haste from the nearby streets to simu¬ 
late a send-off like those of other times. Numerous 
launches sailed around the docks, loaded with lighthearted 
women shouting provocations at the soldiers of the guard, 
who responded with obscene compliments. The General 
arrived at six with the official delegation. He had left the 
Governor's house on foot, walking at a very slow pace, 
his mouth covered by a handkerchief soaked in cologne. 

The day promised to be cloudy. The shops along the 
commercial street had been open since daw n, and some 
did business almost in the open air among the ruined 
shells of houses destroyed by an earthquake twenty years 
before. 1 he General waved his handkerchief to those who 
greeted him from the windows, bur they were the mi¬ 
nority, because the majority watched him pass in silence, 
astounded bv his deteriorated condition. He was in shirt- 


sleeves, wearing his one pair of Wellington boots and a 
white straw liar. In the atrium of the church the priest 
had stood on a chair to deliver a speech, but General 
Carreno stopped him. The General walked up to him and 
shook his hand. 

\\ hen they turned the corner one glance should have 
been enough for him to realize he would not survive the 
slope, but he began the ascent, clutching the arm of Gen¬ 
eral Carreno, until it became apparent he could not go on. 
Then they tried to convince him to use the sedan chan 
that Posada Gutierrez had ready in the event he needed it. 

"No, General, I beg of you/' he said in consternation. 
“Spare me this humiliation/ 1 

He reached the top of the incline, more by strength of 
will than of body, and he still had enough energy to 
descend to the dock without help, There he said goodbye 
with a pleasant remark for each member of the official 
delegation. And he did so with a feigned smile so they 
would not notice that on this May 15 with its ineluctable 
roses he was starting out on his return trip to the void. 
As a memento he gave Governor Posada Gutierrez a gold 
medal engraved with his profile, thanked him for all his 
kindness in a voice strong enough to be heard by every¬ 
one, and embraced him with true emotion. Then he was 
in the stern of the barge waving goodbye with his hat, 
not looking at anyone in the clusters of people making 
their farewells from the shore, not seeing the disorder of 
the launches around the barges or the naked children 
swimming like shad under the water. He continued to 
wave the hat toward a fixed point, with a distant expres¬ 
sion on his face, until all that could be seen was the stump 
of the church tower rising above the ruined walls. Then 


The General in His Labyrinth 

he went inside the shelter on the barge, sat on the ham¬ 
mock, and stretched his legs so that Jose Palacios could 
help him take off his boots. 

“Now we'll see if they really believe we've gone," he 
said. 

I he flotilla was composed of eight barges of varying 
sizes, and a special barge for him and his entourage, with 
a helmsman in the stern and eight oarsmen who propelled 
it with poles made of guaiacum wood. Unlike ordinary 
barges, with a cargo shed of palm in the center, on this 
one they had set up a canvas tent so he could hang his 
hammock in the shade, lined it on the inside with printed 
cotton doth and roofed it with rush matting, and cut four 
windows to increase the ventilation and light. It was 
furnished with a small table for writing or playing cards, 
a bookcase, and an earthen water jar with a stone filter. 
The man responsible for the flotilla, selected from among 
the best on the river, was Casiido Santos, a former cap¬ 
tain in the battalion ol the Marksmen of the Guard who 
had a voice like thunder, a pirate’s patch over his left eye, 
and a somewhat undaunted notion of his authority. 

■r 

May was the first of the good months for Commodore 
Elbcrs’ ships, but rhe good months were not the best ones 
for barges. The mortal heat, the biblical storms, the treach¬ 
erous currents, the menace of wild animals and predatory 
insects at night, all seemed to conspire against the comfort 
of the passengers. An additional torment for someone 
made sensitive by ill health was the pestilential stink of 
rhe strips of salted meat and smoked tish that had been 
hung by mistake on the overhead beams of the presiden¬ 
tial barge, which he ordered removed as soon as he no¬ 
ticed them when he came on board. Having learned in 


#7 


this way that the General could not hear even the odor 
of food. Captain Santos had the provisioning barge with 
its pens of live chickens and pigs moved to last place in the 
flotilla, and from the very first day of navigation, when 
the General devoured two plates of coramea] mush with 
great delight, it was established he would not eat anything 
else during the voyage. 

“This seems to have been prepared by the magical 
hand of Fernanda the Seventh,” he said. 

And it was. His personal cook for the last few years, 
rhe Quire ha Fernanda liarriga, whom he called Fernanda 
the Seventh when she obliged him to eat something he 
did not like, was on board without his knowledge. She 
was an imperturbable, fat, sharp-tongued Indian whose 
greatest virtue was not good seasoning in the kitchen but 
an instinct for pleasing the General at the table. Fie had 
resolved that she would stay in Santa Fc de Bogota with 
Manuela Saenz, who made her parr of her domestic staff, 
but in Guaduas General Carreno sent for her with great 
urgency after Jose Palacios announced to him in alarm 
that the General had not eaten a full meal since rhe eve of 
his departure. She had arrived in Hond;< in the early hours 
of rhe morning, and they hid her on the provisioning 
barge to wait for the right moment to nuke her appear¬ 
ance. This presented itself sooner than expected because 
of the pleasure the General felt when he ate the corn- 
meal mush, his favorite food since his health began to 
decline. 

The first day of navigation might have been the last. 
Night fell at two o'clock in the afternoon, the water 
raged, thunder and lightning shook the earth, and the 
oarsmen seemed incapable of keeping the boats trom 


The General in His Labyrinth 


breaking apart against the cliffs. From his tent the Gen¬ 
eral observed the rescue operation directed at the top of 
his lungs by Captain Santos, whose naval ingenuity did 
not seem adequate to this kind of emergency. He ob¬ 
served first with curiosity and then with indomitable 
apprehension, and at the culminating moment of dinger 
he realized that the Captain had given the wrong order. 
Allowing himself to be carried along by instinct, he 
made his way through the wind and the rain, and at the 
very edge of the abyss he countermanded the Captain's 
order. 

“Not that way!” he shouted. “To the right, the right, 
damn it!” 

The oarsmen responded to the shattered voice still full 
of an irresistible authority, and without realizing it he 
took over command until the crisis had passed. Jose Pa¬ 
lacios hurried to cover him with a blanket. Wilson and 
Ibarra held him upright where he stood. Captain Santos 
moved to one side, conscious once again of having con¬ 
fused port and starboard, and waited with a soldier's hu¬ 
mility until the General looked around for him and found 
him with a wavering glance. 

“You’ll forgive me, Captain,” he said to him. 

liut he was not at peace with himself. That night, 
around the fires they lit on the wide beach where they 
pulled ashore for the first time to sleep, he told stories of 
memorable naval disasters. He told about his brother Juan 
Vicente, Kernando’s father, who drowned in a shipwreck 
on his return from Washington, where he had purchased 
a shipment of arms and ammunition for the First Repub¬ 
lic. He told about almost suffering the same fate when 
his horse died between his legs as he was crossing the 


89 


swollen waters of the Arauca and he was pulled along 
head over heels with his boot caught in the stirrup until 
his guide managed to cut the straps. He told about finding 
a capsized boat in the rapids of the Orinoco on his way 
to Angostura, soon after he had assured the independence 
of New Granada, and seeing an officer he did not know 
swimming to shore. He was told it was Genera! Sucre. 
He replied in indignation: “There is no General Sucre." 
But in fact it was Antonio lose de Sucre, who had heen 
promoted a short while before to the rank of general 
of the liberating army, and with whom he had maintained 
an intimate friendship ever since. 

“1 knew about that meeting,” said General Carreiio, 
“but not about the shipwreck.” 

“I may be confusing it with Sucre’s first shipwreck, 
when he escaped from Cartagena with Murillo in pursuit 
and stayed afloat God knows how for almost twenrv*four 
hours,” he said. And he added, not quite to the point: 
“What I'm trying to do is to make Captain Santos under¬ 
stand somehow my impertinence this afternoon.” 

In the early hours of the morning, when everyone 
was sleeping, the entire jungle shuddered to an unac¬ 
companied song that could only come straight from the 
soul. The General bolted upright in the hammock. It’s 
Iturbidc,” murmured josc Palacios in the half-light. No 
sooner had he spoken than a brutal commanding voice 
interrupted the song. 

Agustin de Iturbidc was the oldest son of a Mexican 
general in the wars for independence who had proclaimed 
himself Cmperor of his country but took over a year to 
reach office. The General had felt a distinct affection for 
him from the first time he saw him, standing at attention. 


The General in His Labyrinth 


trembling, unable to control the shaking of his hands at 
finding himself face-to-face with the idol of his youth. 
I le was twenty-two years old at the time. Before he was 
seventeen his father had been shot in a dusty, hot village 
in the Mexican provinces a few hours after returning 
from exile unaware he had been tried in absentia and 
condemned to death for high treason. 

Three things affected the General from the very be¬ 
ginning. One was that Agustin had the watch, made of 
gold and precious gems, sent to him by his father as he 
stood at rhe wall where rhev shot him, which he wore 
on a chain around his neck so that no one could doubt 
how much he honored him. Another was the candor with 
which he told him that his father, dressed in rags so he 
would not be recognized by the guards at the port, had 
been betrayed by the elegance with which he rode a horse. 
The third was how he sang. 

I he Mexican government had placed every kind of 
obstacle in the way of his joining rhe Army of Colombia, 
convinced rhat his training in the arts of war was part of 
a monarchist conspiracy, supported by the General, to 
crown him Emperor of Mexico with the pretender's 
rights of a hereditary prince. The General risked a seri¬ 
ous diplomatic incident, not only by inducting young 
Agustin with his military titles but by making him his 
aide-de-camp. Agustin was worthy of his confidence, al¬ 
though he never enjoyed a day of happiness and only 
the habit of singing allowed him to survive his precarious 
position. 

And therefore when someone silenced him in the jun¬ 
gles of the Magdalena the General, wrapped in a blanket, 
got up from the hammock, crossed the camp, lit by the 


9 i 


fires of the guards, and went out to join him. He found 
him sirring on the bank watching the river go by. 

“Continue singing, Captain, 1 ' he said. 

He sat next to him, and when he knew the words of the 
song he accompanied him in his thin voice. He had never 
heard anyone sing with so much love, and he could not 
remember anyone so sad who could still produce so much 
happiness around him. With Fernando and Andres, who 
had been his classmates at the military school in George¬ 
town, l turbid c had formed a trio that brought a youthful 
air to the General's surroundings, so impoverished by the 
barrenness typical of barracks. 

Agustin and the General continued singing until the 
clamor of the jungle animals startled the alligators sleep¬ 
ing on the shore, and the very heart of the water thrashed 
as if in cataclysm. 1 lie General remained seated on the 
ground, stunned by the awesome awakening of all of 
nature, until a ribbon of orange appeared on the horizon 
and it was light. Then he leaned on frurbide s shoulder 
in order to stand up. 

“Thank you, Captain," he said to him. u With ten men 
singing like you, we could save the world." 

41 Ah, General," sighed Iturbide. “What I wouldn’t give 
if my mother could hear you say that." 

On the second day of the voyage they saw well-kept 
haciendas with blue meadowlands and handsome horses 
running free, but then the jungle began, and everything 
became contiguous and unchanging. Earlier they had 
started to pass rafts made of enormous tree trunks that 
the woodcutters who lived on the riverbanks were caking 
to Cartagena dc Indias to sell They were so slow they 
seemed unmoving in the current, and entire families with 


The General in His Labyrinth 


their children and animals traveled on them with only 
the meager protection from the sun provided bv simple 
lean-tos made of palm. Ar some bends in the jungle they 
could already see the first devastation caused by the steam¬ 
ship crews in order to feed the boilers. 

“The fish will have to learn to walk on land because 
the water will disappear,'* he said. 

The heat grew intolerable during the day and the rau¬ 
cous screams of the monkeys and birds became madden¬ 
ing, but the nights w r ere silent and cool. On the broad 
beaches the afigators lay motionless for hours on end, 
their jaws open to catch butterflies. Next to the deserted 
settlements they could sec corn plantings, and skeletal 
dogs that barked as the vessels passed by, and even in the 
uninhabited wilds there were tapir traps, and fishing nets 
drying in the sun, but there was no sign of any human 
being. 

Idleness was painful after so many years of wars, bitter 
governments, and trivial loves. The little life with which 
the General began the day was spent meditating in the 
hammock. His immediate reply to President Cavcedo 
had brought his correspondence up-to-date, but he passed 
the time dictating inconsequential letters. During the first 
few days Fernando finished reading aloud the gossip-laden 
chronicles of Lima, and could not interest him in any¬ 
thing else. 

It was the last book he read in its entirety. He had been 
a reader of imperturbable voracity during the respites 
after battles and the rests after love, but a reader without 
order or method. He read at any hour, in whatever light 
was available, sometimes strolling under the trees, some¬ 
times on horseback under the equatorial sun, sometimes 


93 


in dim coaches rattling over cobbled pavements, some¬ 
times swaying in the hammock as he dictated a letter. A 
bookseller in Lima had been surprised at the abundance 
and variety of works he selected from a general catalogue 
that listed everything from Greek philosophers to a trea¬ 
tise on chiromancy. In his youth he read the Romantics 
under the influence of his tutor, Simon Rodriguez, and 
he continued to devour them as if he were reading himself 
and his own idealistic, intense temperament. They were 
impassioned readings that marked him for the rest of his 
life, in the end he read everything that came his way, 
and he did not have a favorite author but rather many 
who had been favorites at different times. The bookcases 
in the various houses he lived in were always crammed 
full, and the bedrooms and hallways were turned into 
narrow passes between steep cliffs of books and moun¬ 
tains of errant documents that proliferated as he passed 
and pursued him without mercy in their quest for archi¬ 
val peace. He never was able to read all the books he 
owned. When he moved to another cirv he left them in 
the care of his most trustworthy friends, although he 
never heard anything about them again, and his life of 
fighting obliged him to leave behind a trail of books and 
papers stretching over four hundred leagues from Bolivia 
to Venezuela, 

Even before his eyes began to fail he had his secretaries 
read to him, and then he read no other way because of the 
annoyance that eyeglasses caused him. But his interest in 
what he read w as decreasing at the same time, and as al¬ 
ways he attributed this to a cause beyond his control, 

1 he fact is there are fewer and fewer good books, + 
he would say. 


The General in His Labyrinth 


Jose Palacios was the only one who showed no signs 
of boredom in the torpor of the voyage, and the heat and 
discomfort in no way affected his elegant manncis and 
dress or his meticulous service. He was six years younger 
than the General, in whose house he had been born a 
slave through the misadventure of an African woman and 
a Spaniard, from whom he had inherited his carrot-red 
hair, the freckles on his face and hands, and his light- 
blue eyes. In contrast to his natural sobriety, he owned 
the most complete and expensive wardrobe in the entire 
entourage. 1 le had spent his entire life with the General— 
his two exiles, his campaigns from beginning to end, and 
all his battles in the from line—and always as a civilian, 
for he never acknowledged his right to u ear a military 
uniform. 

The worst part of the voyage was forced immobility. 
One afternoon the General was so desperate with pacing 
the narrow confines of the canvas tent that he had the 
boat stop so he could rake a walk. In the hardened mud 
rhev saw tracks that seemed to be those of a bird as large 

as an ostrich and at least as Heavy as an ox. but this seemed 

* 

normal to the oarsmen, who said there were men roaming 
that desolate place who were as big as ceiba trees and 
had the crests and claws of roosters. He scoffed at the 
legend, as he scoffed at everything that had the slightest 
glimmer of the supernatural, but his walk took longer 
than expected and they had to make camp against the 
judgment of the captain and even his military aides, who 
considered the place dangerous and unhealthy. He spent 
a sleepless night, tortured by the heat and the clouds of 
mosquitoes that seemed to fly through the suffocating 
nets, unsettled by the fearful roars of a puma that kept 


95 


them on the alert all night. At about two o’clock in the 
morning he went to chat with the groups standing watch 
around the bonfires. Only at dawn, as he contemplated 
the vast swamps gilded by the rising sun. did he renounce 
the dream that had kept him awake. 

“All right," he said, “ well have to leave without seeing 
our friends with the rooster claws.” 

Just as they weighed anchor a filthy, emaciated dog, 
suffering from mange and a paralyzed paw, leaped onto 
the barge. 1 he General's two Jogs attacked him, bur the 
invalid defended himself with suicidal ferocity and re- 
fused to surrender even u hen he was covered with blood 
and his rhroat had been tom open, The General g.ivfc 
orders to keep him, and Jose Palacios rook charge of him, 
as he had done so many times with sn many nrher stray 
dogs. 

: hat same dav they rescued a German who had been 
abandoned on an island of sand for beating one of his 
oarsmen. When he came on board he represented himself 
as an astronomer and a botanist, but in conversation it 
became evident he knew nothing about either science. 

On the other hand, he had seen with his own eyes the men 

* 

with rooster claws, and he was determined to capture 
one alive, put it in a cage, and exhibit it in Europe as a 
phenomenon comparable only to the Spider Woman of 
the Americas, who had caused such a sensation in the 
pons of Andalusia a century before, 

“Take me instead," the General said to him, “I assure 
you you'll earn more money showing me in a cage as the 
biggest damn fool in history," 

At first he had thought him an agreeable charlatan, but 
that changed when the German began to tell indecent 


The General in His Labyrinth 


jokes about the shameless pederasty of Baron Alexander 
von Humboldt. “We should leave him on the beach 
again.' he said to Jose Palacios. In the afternoon they 
came across the mail launch sailing upstream, and the 
General used all his charm to have the mail agent open 
the sacks of official correspondence and give him his let¬ 
ters. And then he asked him to please take the German 
to the port of Nare, and the agent agreed even though 
the launch was overloaded. That night, while Fernando 
was reading the letters to him, the General growled: 

"That motherfucker isn't worth a single hair on Hum¬ 
boldt’s head.” 

He had been thinking about the Baron even before 
they rescued the German, for he could not imagine how 
he had survived in that untamed wild. He had met him 
during his years in Paris, after Humboldt's return from 
his trip through the equinoctial countries, and he had 
been as astonished by the splendor of his beauty, the 
likes of which he had never seen in anv woman, as by 
his intelligence and erudition. On the other hand, what 
he had found least convincing was the Baron’s certainty 
that the Spanish colonies in America were ripe for inde¬ 
pendence, He had said as much without a tremor in his 
voice, at a time when the thought had not occurred to the 
General even as an idle Sunday fantasy. 

“All that’s missing is the man,” Humboldt said. 

He told Jose Palacios about it many years later, in 
Cuzco, perhaps because he found himself at the top of 
the world at a moment when history had just demon¬ 
strated that he was the man. He did not tell anyone else, 
but each time the Baron was mentioned he took the op¬ 
portunity to pay tribute to his prescience: 


97 


“Humboldt opened my* eyes." 

It was the fourth time he had traveled along the Mag¬ 
dalena, and he could not escape the impression that he 
was retracing the steps of his life. He had sailed its waters 
for the first time in 1813, when he was a colonel in the 
militia who had been defeated in his own country and 

W 

had come to Cartagena de Indias from his exile in Curasao 
in search of resources to continue the war. New’ Granada 
had been divided into autonomous fragments, the cause 
of independence was losing popular support in the face 
of savage repression by the Spaniards, and final v ictory 
seemed less and less certain. On the third voyage, aboard 
a paddlcboac, as he called it, the work of liberation had 
been concluded but his almost maniacal dream of con* 
tinental unity was beginning to crumble. On this, his 
final voyage, the dream was already destroyed, but it 
survived in a single sentence he never tired of repeating; 
“Gur enemies will have all the advantages until we unijy 
the government of America 

Of the countless memories he shared with Jose Palacios, 
one of the most moving was that first voyage, when they 
waged the war to liberate the river, He led two hundred 
men armed with whatever weapons they could find, and 
in some twenty days there was not a single monarchist 
Spaniard left in rhe Magdalena Basin* Jose Palacios him¬ 
self realized how much things had changed when, on the 
fourth day of the voyage, they began to see the ran its of 
women along the riverbanks at every village, waiting for 
the barges to pass, ‘‘Those are rhe widows/ he said. 1 he 
General looked out and saw them, dressed in black, lined 
up on the bank like pensive crows under the burning sun, 
waiting for anything, even if it was only a charitable 


The General in His Labyrinth 


greeting; General Diego Ibarra, Andres' brother, used to 
say the General never had a child but was, instead, father 
and mother to all the widows in the nation. They followed 
him everywhere, and he kept them alive with heartfelt 
words that were true proclamations of consolation. Nev¬ 
ertheless, he was thinking more of himself than of them 
when he saw the lines of funereal women in the villages 
along the river, 

“Now we are the widows," he said. “We are the or¬ 
phans, the wounded, the pariahs of independence." 

They did not stop in any town before Mom pox except 
Puerto Real, where the Oca ha emptied into the Mag¬ 
dalena River, There they met General josc Laurencio 
Silva, the Venezuelan who had completed his mission of 
accompanying the rebel grenadiers to the border of their 
country and had come to join the cortege. 

The General remained on board until nightfall, when 
he went ashore to steep in an improvised encampment. 
While he was on the barge he received the ranks of the 
widows, the impoverished, the helpless of all the wars 
who wanted to see him. He remembered almost all of 
them with astounding accuracy. Those who had remained 
were dying of poverty, others had gone in search of new 
wars to survive or had become highwaymen, like count¬ 
less veterans of the liberating army everywhere in the 
nation. One of them summed up their feelings in a phrase: 
“Wc have independence. General, so now tell us what to 
do with it/ In the euphoria of victory he had taught 
them to speak to him this way, with the truth in their 
mouths* But now truth had changed masters, 

“Independence was a simple question of winning the 


99 


war,” he said to them. ‘ ! lie great sacrifices must come 
afterwards, to make a single nation out of all these coun- 

* ti 

tries. 

“\Wve made nothing but sacrifices, General/’ they 
said. 

He would not give an inch: 

“More are needed/ 1 he said. "Unity has no price/' 

1 har night, as he wandered around the building where 
they had hung his hammock, he saw a woman who turned 
to look at hint as he passed, and he was surprised by her 
lack of surprise at his nakedness. He even heard the words 
of the song she was singing under her breath: “ 7 Y/i me 
it's never too Ijte to die of love. ' I he watchman was 
awake under the portico. 

“Is any woman here?” the General asked him. 

The man was certain. ‘ None worthy of Your Excel¬ 
lency/ 1 he said* 

“And unworthy of my excellency? T# 

“None at all/* said the watchman* “There's no woman 
within a league of here/' 

The General was so sure he had seen her that he looked 
for her everywhere in the house until it grew very late. 
He insisted that his aidcs-de-eamp join the search, and 
the next day he delayed their departure for more than an 
hour until he was vanquished by the repeated reply: there 
was no one. The matter was not spoken of again. For the 
rest of the journey * each time he thought of it he insisted 
he had seen her* Jose Palacios would sun ive him by many 
years* with so much time to review his lile with him that 

■r 

not even the most insignificant detail remained in shadow, 
file only matter he never clarified was whether the vision 


The General in His Labyrinth 


that night in Puerto Real had been a dream, a hallucina¬ 
tion, or an apparition. 

No one thought again about the stray dog, still with 
them recovering from his wounds, until the orderly in 
charge of the food realized he had no name. They had 
bathed him and perfumed him with baby powder, but 
they could not rid him of his dissolute appearance or the 
stench of mange, t he General was taking the air in the 
stem when Jose Palacios pulled the dog over to him. 

u What name shall we give him?*’ he asked. 

The General did not even have to think about it. 

“Bolivar,” he said. 


a gunboat moored in port began to i iovc as soon 
as it was informed that a flotilla of barges was approach¬ 
ing. lose Palacios sighted it through the tent windows, 
and he leaned over the hammock where rhe Genera! was 
lying with his eyes closed, 

“Sir," he said, “we’re in Mompox.” 

"God’s country," said the General, without opening 
his eyes. 

As they sailed down to the coast the river had grown 
more vast and solemn, like a swamp with no beginning or 
end, and the heat was so dense you could touch it with 
your hands. Without bitterness the General gave up the 
sudden dawns 3nd piercing twilights that had kept him 
in the stern of rhe barge for the first few days, and he 
yielded to dejection. He did not dictare letters, or read, 
or ask his companions anv question that might reveal a 
certain interest in life. Even during the hottest siestas he 
covered himself with rhe blanket and stayed in rhe ham¬ 
mock with his eyes closed. Thinking he had not heard 
him, Jose Palacios repeated the message, and again the 
General responded without opening his eyes. 


The General in His Labyrinth 


“Mompox doesn’t exist,” he said. “Sometimes we dream 
about it, but it doesn’t exist.” 

“At least I can testify to the existence of the Santa 
Barbara Tower,” said lose Palacios. “1 see it from here.” 

The General opened his tormented eyes, sat up in the 
hammock, and in the aluminum light of noon saw the 
first roofs of the very ancient and long-suffering city of 
Mompox that had been devastated by war, debased by the 
turmoil of the Republic, decimated by smallpox, f his 
was the time when the river had begun to change course 
with an irreparable disdain thar would become total aban¬ 
donment by the end of the century. All that remained of 
the masonry dike that the colonial governors, with Pen¬ 
insular obstinacy, had hastened to rebuild each time it 
was destroyed by flood was rubble scattered along a 
beach of fallen stones. T he warship approached the 
barges, and a black officer who still wore the uniform of 
the old viceregal police aimed the cannon at them. Cap¬ 
tain Casildo Samos managed to shout: 

“Hey, black man, don't be an idiot!" 

The oarsmen stopped rowing, and the barges were left 
to the mercy of the current. The grenadiers, waiting for 
orders, raised their rifles and took aim at the gunboat. 
The officer was unperturbed. 

“Passports.” he shouted. “In the name of the law." 

Only then did he see the soul in torment who emerged 
from under the canvas, the exhausted hand that still held 
inexorable authority ordering the soldiers to lower their 
weapons. Then he said to the officer in a faint voice: 

“Although you may not believe it, Captain, I have no 
passport." 

i he officer did nor know who he was. But when Fer- 


ioj 

mndo told him he leaped into the water with his weapons 
and ran down the riverbank to inform everyone of the 

w 

good news. The gunboat, its bell clanging, escorted the 
barges into port. Even before the entire city came into 
view at the last bend in the river, the bells of its eight 
churches were ringing our the tidings. 

During the colonial period Santa Cruz dc Mompox had 
been the commercial bridge between the Caribbean coast 
and the interior of the country, and this had been the 
origin of its wealth. When the windstorms of liberty 
began to blow, that stronghold of the American aris¬ 
tocracy was the first to proclaim independence. Recon¬ 
quered by Spain, it was liberated again by the General 
himself. It consisted of only three wide, straight, and 
dusty streets running parallel to the river, with large- 
windowed, one-story houses where two counts and three 
marquises prospered. The fame of its craftsmanship in 
precious metals had survived the vicissitudes of the Rc- 

On this occasion the General arrived so disillusioned 
with his glory and so disenchanted with the world that 
he was caught off guard bv the crowd waiting for him 
in port. He rhrew on his velveteen trousers and high 
boots, wrapped himself in the blanker despite the heat, 
and changed his nightcap for the broad-brimmed hat he 
had used in Honda for waving farewell. 

The funeral of a high dignitary was taking place in 
the Church of La Concepcion. In attendance at the sol¬ 
emn Mass were all the civil and ecclesiastical authorities, 
the congregations and schools, and the leading citizens 
in their finest crepe, and the clamor of the bells made 
them lose their composure because they thought it was 


public. 








The General in His Labyrinth 


a fire alarm. Bur the same bailiff who had entered in great 
agitation and whispered the news into rhe Mayor's ear 
shouted for everyone to hear: 

“The President is in the port!" 

For many still did not know he was no longer President. 
On Monday a mail carrier had spread the rumors from 
Honda among the towns along the river but had clarified 
nothing. And so the ambiguity made the unexpected re¬ 
ception more effusive, and even the bereaved family un¬ 
derstood that most of the mourners would leave the 
church to gather at the ruined wall. Che funeral ended 
before it was over, and only an intimate group accom¬ 
panied the coffin to the cemetery, in the midst of thunder¬ 
ing rockets and bells. 

I ne river was still low because of May's light rainfall, 
and as a consequence the General and his entourage had 
to scale cliffs of stone debris to reach the port. With bad 
grace the General refused someone's offer to carry him, 
and he climbed, leaning on Captain Ibarra's arm, stagger¬ 
ing at each step and struggling to hold himself upright, 
but with his dignity intact. 

He greeted the authorities in the port with energetic 
handshakes of incredible vigor, given the condition of his 
body and the smallness of his hands. Those who had seen 
him the last time he was there could nor believe their 
memories. He seemed as old as his own father, but the little 
breath he had was enough to keep anyone from making 
special arrangements for him. He refused rhe platforms 
carried in Good Friday processions which they had pre¬ 
pared for him, and he said he would walk to the Church 
of La Concepcion. In the end he had to ride the Mayor’s 


i°5 


mule rhat the official had saddled in great haste when he 
saw him disembark in so weakened a state. 

Jose Palacios had noticed many faces in port tiger- 
striped with the red embers of smallpox, a stubborn ill¬ 
ness endemic to the towns of the lower Magdalena. The 
patriots had come to fear it more than they feared the 
Spaniards after it decimated the liberating troops during 
the river campaign. Then, when the smallpox persisted, 
the General arranged for a visiting French naturalist to 
stay long enough to inoculate the people with the serous 
fluid that oozed from the smallpox of cattle. But this 
method of treatment caused so many deaths that in the 
end no one wanted to hear anything more about the cow 
cure, as they called it, and many mothers preferred that 
their children be exposed to the risks of contagion rather 
than the dangers of prevention. Nevertheless, official re¬ 
ports received by the General led him to believe that the 
scourge of smallpox was being conquered. And there¬ 
fore when Jose Palacios pointed out to him the number 
of marked faces in the crowd, his reaction was not so 
much surprise as weary disgust. 

l 1t will always be like this/ 1 he said, u as long as sub¬ 
ordinates lie to make us happy/' 

He did not allow those who welcomed him in port to 
see his bitterness. He gave them a summary accounting 
of the events of his renunciation and the disorder that 
reigned in Santa Fc de Bogota, exhorting them to give 
their unanimous support to the new government, "‘There 
is no other alternative/' he said, “Either unity or an¬ 
archy. 1 ' He said he was going and would not return, nor 
so much to seek relief for the evident afflictions of his 


The General in His Labyrinth 


body, which were numerous and very grave, as to at¬ 
tempt to find respite from the untold sorrow that other 
people's suffering caused him. But he did not say when 
he was going, or where, and he repeated without real 
relevance that he had not yet received from the govern¬ 
ment the passport that would allow him to leave the coun¬ 
try. He thanked them for the twenty years of glory that 
Mompox had bestowed upon him and begged them not 
to honor him with any title except Citizen. 

The Church of La Concepcion was still draped in 
mourning and the breath of funeral flowers and candles 
still floated through rhe air when the crowd trooped in 
for an improvised Tc Deum. jose Palacios, sitting with 
the rest of the entourage, realized that the General could 
find no comfort in his pew. Vet the Mayor, an immutable 
mestizo with a handsome leonine head, stayed next to 
him inside a closed circle. Fernanda, the Widow Ben- 
l umea, whose American beauty had created havoc at the 
court in Madrid, lent rhe General her sandalwood fan to 
help him defend himself against the stupefying ceremony. 
I le moved it back and forth without hope, not even for 
rhe consolation of its little gusts of air, until the heat 
began to interfere with his breathing. Then he whis¬ 
pered in the Mayor’s ear: 

“Believe me, I don't deserve this punishment.” 

"The love of the people has its price. Excellency,’' said 
the Mayor. 

"Sad to say, this isn’t love, it's curiosity,” he said. 

When the Te Deum was over he said goodbye to the 
Widow Bcnjumea with a bow and returned her fan. She 
attempted to give it back to him. 


■'Do me the honor of keeping ir as a remembrance of 
one who loves you well," she said to him* 

I he sad thing, Schora, is that I do not have much time 
left for remembering,” he said. 

The priest insisted on protecting him from the suffo¬ 
cating heat with the Holy Week canopy as they walked 
from the Church of La Concepcion to the Academy of 
San Pedro Apbstol, a two-story mansion with a monastic 
cloister of terns and pinks, and a luminous orchard of 
fruit trees in the rear* The arcaded corridors were not 
habitable during those months because of unhealthy winds 
that blew in from the river even at night, but the rooms 
adjoining the large parlor were protected by thick ma¬ 
sonry walls that kept them in autumnal shadow. 

Jose Palacios had gone ahead to have everything ready. 
The bedroom, its rough walls covered by a fresh coat of 
whitewash, was dimly lit by a single green-shuttered 
window that looked out on the orchard. He had the posi¬ 
tion of the bed changed so that the window facing the 
orchard would be at the foot and not at the head of the 
bed, and in this way the General could see the yellow 
guavas on the trees and enjoy their perfume. 

I Tic General arrived on Fernando’s arm and in the 
company of the priest from the Church of La Concepcion, 
who was also the rector of the academy. As soon as he 
walked through the door he leaned his back against the 
wall, surprised by the scent of the guavas Iving in a gourd 
on the windowsill, their luxuriant fragrance saturating 
the entire bedroom- He stood with his eyes closed, inhal¬ 
ing the heartbreaking aroma of days gone by until he lost 
his breath. Then he scrutinized the room with meticulous 














The General in His Labyrinth 


attention as if each object were a revelation. In addition 
to the canopied bed there was a mahogany chest of draw¬ 
ers, a marble-topped night table, also of mahogany, and 
an easy chair covered in red velvet. On the wall beside 
the window was an octagonal clock with Roman numer¬ 
als, which had stopped at seven minutes past one. 

“At last, something’s still the same!" said the General. 

The priest was surprised. 

“Excuse me. Excellency,” he said, “but as far as I 
know, you’ve never been here before.” 

lose Palacios was also surprised, for they had never 
visited this house, but the General persisted in his recol¬ 
lections, with so many accurate references that he left 

jF 

everyone perplexed. In the end, however, he attempted 
to reassure them with his habitual irony. 

“Perhaps it was during a previous incarnation,” he said. 
“After all, anything is possible in a city where we've just 
seen an excommunicated naan walking under a canopy." 

A short while later a thunderstorm broke that left the 
city shipwrecked. The General took advantage of it to 
recover from his reception, enjoying the scent of the 
guavas in the shadowy room while he pretended to sleep 
on his back with all his clothes on, and then in fact did 
fall asleep in the recuperative silence following the del¬ 
uge. Jose Palacios knew this was true when he heard 
him speaking with the good diction and sharp timbre of 
his youth, which by this rime he regained only in sleep. 
He talked of Caracas, a city in ruins that was no longer his, 
its walls papered with attacks against him and its streets 
overflowing with a torrent of human shit. In a corner of 
the room, almost invisible in the easy chair, [ose Palacios 
watched to make certain that no one outside the entou- 


log 


rage could hear the secrets of his sleep. Through the half- 
opened door he signaled ro Colonel Wilson, who sent 
away the soldiers of the guard wandering through the 
garden, 

“Nobody wants us here, and in Caracas nobody obeys 
us/* said the sleeping General, ‘it all evens out," 

He continued with a psaltery of bitter laments, rem¬ 
nants of a ruined glory that the wind of death was carry¬ 
ing away in tatters. After almost an hour of delirium, 
noises in the corridor and the metal of an arrogant voice 
awoke him. He snorted abruptly and spoke in his faded 
waking voice without opening his eyes: 

“What the hell's going go?” 

What was going on was that General Lorenzo Cir- 
camo T a veteran of the wars of emancipation with a thorny 
disposition and an almost demented personal courage, 
was trying to force his way into the bedroom before the 
hour scheduled for interviews. He had pushed Colonel 
Wilson aside after hitting a lieutenant of the grenadiers 
with his saber, and he had bowed only to the other¬ 
worldly power of the priest, who led him, unprotesting, 
to an adjacent office. The General, informed by Wilson, 
shouted in indignation: 

“Tell Carcamo 1 died! 1 hat's alt, just tel! him I died!’ 

Colonel Wilson went to the office to confront the ob¬ 
streperous soldier, who was dressed for the occasion in 
his parade uniform and a constellation of combat medals* 
But by then his arrogance had collapsed and his eyes were 
flooded with tears. 

“No, Wilson, don't give me the message/' he said* 4 i ve 
already heard it." 

W hen the General opened his eyes he realized the 


The General in His Labyrinth 


clock still read seven minutes past one. Jose Palacios 
wound it, set it from memory, and then confirmed the 
time on his two watches. A little later Fernanda Barriga 
came in and tried to have the General eat some vegetable 
stew. He resisted, although he had not eaten anything 
since the previous day, but he ordered the food brought 
to the office so that he could eat during the interviews. 
In the meantime he succumbed to temptation and picked 
up one of the many guavas in rhe gourd. He was intoxi¬ 
cated by its aroma for a moment, gave it a greedy bite, 
chewed the flesh with childish delight, tasted the fruit on 
all sides, and swallowed it little by little with a long sigh 
of memory. Then he sat on the hammock with the gourd 
of guavas between his legs, and he ate them all, one after 
the other, almost not taking the time to breathe. Jose Pa¬ 
lacios took him bv surprise u’hen there was only one left. 

“We’ll kill ourselves!" 

The General mimicked him with good humor: 

“No deader than we are already.” 

Ac three-thirty sharp, the prearranged hour, he gave 
orders for the visitors to begin to come into the office in 
twos, for in this way he could finish with one in the short¬ 
est time by letting him see his haste to attend to the other. 
Dr. Nicasio del Valle, who was among the first, found him 
sitting with his back to a glass-paned window through 
which one could see the entire farm and beyond that the 
steaming swamps. In his hand he held the plate of vege¬ 
table stew that Fernanda Barriga had brought him and 
that he did not even taste because he was already begin¬ 
ning to fed the effects of his ovcrindulgcnce in rhe guavas. 
Dr. del Valle later summarized his impression of the inter¬ 
view in unadorned language: “That man’s goose was 



11 [ 


cooked.” Everyone who came for an interview agreed* 
each in his own way. Nevertheless, even those most 
couched by his weakness lacked compassion, for they 
urged him to travel to neighboring villages to be god¬ 
father to children* or to inaugurate public works, or to 
sec for himself the poverty in which people lived because 
of the government s negligence. 

After an hour the nausea and stomach cramps caused 
by the guavas became alarming, and he had to call a halt 
to the interviews despite his desire to accommodate every¬ 
one who had been waiting since the morning. There was 
no room in the patio for more calves, goats, chickens, or 
the different kinds of wild game that had been brought 
as gifts. The grenadiers had to intervene to prevent a 
disturbance, but by dusk the situation had returned to 
normal thanks to a second providential downpour, which 
cleared the air and enhanced the silence. 

Despite the Generals explicit refusal, a dinner in his 
honor had been prepared for four o'clock at a nearby 
house. But it was held without him, for the carminative 
power of rhe guavas kept him in a state of emergency 
until after eleven o'clock that night.. He stayed in the 
hammock, prostrate with torturous shooting pains and 
fragrant farts, feeling his soul slip away in abrasive waters. 
The priest brought a medicine prepared by the pharma¬ 
cist at the Academy. The General refused it. “If I lost 

m 

power with one emetic. Old Nick will carry me away 
with a second,” he said. I le abandoned himself to his fate, 
shivering with rhe icy sweat in his bones, his only con* 
solation the occasional snatches of beautiful string music 
wafting in from the banquet held without him. kittle by 
little the flood from his beliv subsided, the pain passed. 


The General in His Labyrinth 


the music ended, and he remained floating in nothingness. 

His previous visit to Mompox had almost been the last. 
He was returning from Caracas after effecting, through 
the magic of his person, an emergency reconciliation 
with General Jose Antonio Paez, who was, nevertheless, 
very far from renouncing his separatist dream. At that 
time his enmity with Santander was public knowledge 
and had gone to the extreme of the General's refusing to 
receive any more of his letters because he no longer crusted 
either his heart or Ids morality. “Save yourself the trouble 
of catling yourself my friend,’’ he wrote to him. The im¬ 
mediate pretext for Santandcrist animosity was a hurried 
proclamation the General had made to the people of the 
city in which he said, without thinking too much about 
it, that all his actions had been guided by the liberty and 
glory of Caracas. On his return to New Granada he had 
tried to smooth things over with an appropriate phrase 
for Cartagena and Mompox: “If Caracas gave me life, 
you gave me glory." But it looked too much like rhe¬ 
torical fence-mending to placate the demagoguery of the 
Santanderists. 

In an attempt to hold off the final disaster, the General 
was returning to Santa Fc dc Bogota w'ith a column of 
troops, hoping to gather others along the way, in order 
to begin once again the struggle for national integrity. 
He had said then that this was his decisive moment, which 
is just what he had said when he- marched off to prevent 
the separation of Venezuela. A little more reflection 
would have permitted him to realize that for almost 
twenty years no moment of his life had not been decisive. 
“The entire Church, the entire army, the immense ma¬ 
jority of the nation, were on my side,” he would write 



later, remembering those days. But despite all these ad¬ 
vantages, he said, it had been proved over and over again 
that when he abandoned the south to inarch north, and 
vice versa, the country he left behind was lost, devastated 
by new civil wars. It was his destiny. 

The Santanderist press missed no opportunity to attrib¬ 
ute military defeats to his nocturnal excesses. Among the 
many other lies intended to diminish his glory, at that 
time they published the story in Santa Fe de Bogota rhat 
not he but General Santander had been m command at 
the battle of Boyaea, where independence had been as¬ 
sured at seven o'clock in the morning of August j t 1819, 
while he was pleasuring himself in Funja with a lady of 
dubious reputation in viceregal society. 

In any case, it was not just the Santanderist press that 
evoked his libertine nights in order to discredit him, Even 
before the final victory ir was said that at least three bat¬ 
tles in the w ars for independence had been lost only be¬ 
cause he was not where he was supposed to be bur in 
some woman's bed instead. During another of his visits 
to Mompox, a caravan of women of diverse ages and 
colors came down the second of the three streets and left 
the air heavy with cheap perfume. They rode sidesaddle, 
carried parasols of printed satin, and wore dresses of ex¬ 
quisite silk the likes of which had never been seen in the 
city. No one denied the speculation that they were the 
Generals concubines, traveling ahead of him. A false spec¬ 
ulation, like so many others, for his wartime harems were 
one of the many salon fabrications that pursued him be¬ 
yond the grave. 

There was nothing new in these methods of slanted 
reporting. I he General himself had used them during 


The General in His Labyrinth 




the war against Spain, when he ordered Santander to 
print false news items in order to deceive the Spanish 
commanders. And therefore when the Republic was al¬ 
ready established and he criticized this same Santander 
for his misuse of rhe press, he responded with exquisite 
sarcasm: 

“We had a good teacher, Excellency.” 

“A bad teacher,” the General replied, “for you must 
remember that the news we invented was turned against 

us." I 

He was so sensitive to everything said about him, true 
or false, that he never recovered from any falsehood, and 
until the moment of his death he struggled to disprove 
them. Nevertheless, he did little to protect himself from 
lies. As he had on other occasions, the last time he was in 
Mom pox he gambled his glory for the sake of a woman. 

She was Joscfa Sagrario. a highborn Mompoxina who, 
disguised in a Franciscan habit, made her way past seven 
guard stations using the password given to her by Jose 
Palacios: “God’s country.” She was so white that her 

m 

dazzling body made her visible in the darkness. That 
night, moreover, she had succeeded in surpassing the mira¬ 
cle of tier beauty with that of her ornamentation, for over 
the front and the back of her dress she had hung a cuirass 
of magnificent local goldwork. And when he tried to 
carry her to the hammock he could scarcely lift her be¬ 
cause of the w r eight of the gold. At dawn, after a night 
of abandon, she felt the terror of transience and begged 
him to stay another night. 

It was an enormous risk, since according to the Gen¬ 
eral's secret agents Santander had organized a conspiracy 
to scrip him of his power and dismember Colombia. But 



< <5 


he stayed, and not just one night. He stayed ten, and they 
were so happy they both came to believe that in fact they 
loved each other more than anyone in this world ever 
had before. 

She gave him her gold. “For your wars,” she said. He 
did not use it because of his scruples regarding treasure 
earned in bed and therefore ill-gotten, and he left it in 
the keeping of a friend. He forgot it. After the attack 
caused by the guavas on his final visit to Mompox, the 
General had the chest opened to verity its contents, and 
only then did he find the gold, along with her name and 
date, in his memory. 

m 

ft was a miraculous vision: josefa Sagrario’s gold cuirass 
made of different kinds of exquisite metalwork* with a 
total weight of thirty pounds. And there was a case with 
twenty-three forks, twenty-four knives, tw enty-four tea¬ 
spoons, and a small sugar tongs, all of gold, as well as 
other household items o' great value, also left behind on 
different occasions for safekeeping, and also forgotten. 
In the fabulous disorder of the Generals treasuries, these 
discoveries in the most un thought-of places no longer 
surprised anyone. He gave instructions that the flatware 
should be added to his baggage and that the trunk full of 
gold should be returned to its owner. But the priest who 
was rector of San Pedro A posted astounded him with the 
news that Josefa Sagra.no and her family were living in 
exile in Italy for conspiring against the security of the 
state, 

“More of Santander's shit, of course, " said the General 

“No, General, 1 ’ said the priest. "You exiled them your¬ 
self without realizing if after the troubles in ’28.” 

He left the chest of gold where it was while he clarified 



The General in His Labyrinth 

the matter, and then he did not concern himself anymore 
about her exile. For as he told Jose Palacios, he was cer¬ 
tain that Josefa Sagrario would return along with the 
horde of his proscribed enemies as soon as he lost sight of 
the Cartagena coastline. 

Cassandro must be packing his trunks by now/' he 
said. 

And in fact, many exiles began their own repatriation 
as soon as they learned he was on his way to Europe. But 
General Santander, a man of sober reflections and un¬ 
fathomable decisions, was one of the last. The news of 
the renunciation put him on the alert, but he gave no signs 
of returning, and he did not hasten to conclude the avid 
study trips through the countries of Europe that he had 
undertaken as soon as he disembarked in Hamburg in 
October of the previous year. On March i % 1831, when 
he was in Florence, he read in the Journal du Commerce 
that the General had died. Nevertheless, he did not be¬ 
gin his slow return until six months later, when a new 
government restored his military ranks and honors and 
the Congress elected him President of the Republic in 
absentia. 

Before weighing anchor in A bun pox, the General made 
an apologetic visit to Lorenzo Careanio, his old comrade 
in arms. Only then did he learn that he was gravely ill 
and got up from his bed the previous afternoon only to 
greet him. Despite the ravages of illness, Carcamo had to 
make an effort to control the power of his body, and his 
voice thundered white he used pillows to dry the flood 
of tears that poured from his eves without anv connection 
at all to his state of mind. 

Together they lamented their misfortunes, mourned 


the frivolity of nations and the ingratitude of victory, 
and ranted against Santander, who was always an oblig¬ 
atory topic for them. The General had not often been 
so explicit. During the campaign of i8ij Lorenzo Car- 
camo had been witness to a violent altercation between 
the Genera] and Santander when the latter refused to 
obey his order to cross the frontier in order to liberate 
Venezuela a second time. General Carcamo still thought 
this had been the origin of a deep-seated bitterness that 
the passage of rime did no more than exacerbate. 

The General, on the other hand, believed this was not 
the end but rather the beginning of a great friendship* 
Nor was it true that the origin of their antagonism lay in 
the privileges granted to General Paez, or the ill-fated 
Constitution of Bolivia, or the imperial investiture the 
Genera! accepted in Peru, or the lifelong presidency and 
Senate membership he dreamed of in Colombia, or the 
absolute powers he assumed afte] the Ocana Convention, 
No: these reasons and many others like them had not 
caused the terrible animosity that grew more bitter with 
the years until it culminated in the assassination attempt 
of September 15. “The real reason was that Santander 
could never assimilate the idea that this continent should 
be a single nation, 1 said the General, “The unity of 
America was too much for him. ' He looked at Lorenzo 
Carcamo, lying on his bed as if it were the last battlefield 
of a war that had been doomed from the start, and he 
ended the visit, 

“Of course none of this means anything now that the 
patient has died/' he said. 

Lorenzo Carcamo watched him stand up, sad and 
stripped of everything, and he realized that for both the 


The General in His Labyrinth 


General and himself, memories were more of a burden 
than the vears. When he grasped the General's hand 
between both of his he also realized that each had a fever, 
and he wondered which of their deaths would keep them 
from seeing each other again. 

“We lost a world, Simon my old friend," said Lorenzo 
Care am o. 

"They lost it for us,” said the General. “And the only 
thing to do now is start again from the beginning.” 

“And we will,” said Lorenzo Carcamo. 

"Not me," said the General. “All that’s left for me 
is for them to throw me out with the garbage." 

As a memento i .orenzo Carcamo gave him a pair of pis¬ 
tols in a beautiful crimson satin case. He knew the Gen¬ 
eral did not like firearms, and that in his few personal 
quarrels he had trusted to the sword. But these pistols 
possessed the moral virtue of having once been used with 
success in a duel for love, and the General accepted them 
with emotion. A few days later, in Turbaco, the news 
would reach him that General Carcamo had died. 

i he signs were auspicious when the voyage was re¬ 
sumed at dusk on May 13. Propelled more by favorable 
currents than by the oarsmen, the barges left behind the 
slate precipices and the mirages on the wide beaches. The 
rafts made of tree trunks, which they were seeing now 
in greater numbers, seemed swifter. Unlike the ones they 
had observed earlier, these had dreamy little houses with 
flowerpots, and clothes hung to dry in the windows, and 
they carried wire chicken coops, milk cows, and shabby 
children who continued to wave at the barges long after 
they had passed by. They traveled all night through a 


i 19 


flock of stars. At dawn they sighted the town of Zam¬ 
brano* brilliant in the early light. 

Don Casttilo Campillo, nicknamed The Kid, was wait* 
mg for them under the huge ceiba tree in port, having 
prepared a coastal sancocho stew at his house in honor 
of the General. I he invitation was inspired by the legend 
that on his first visit to Zambrano he had eaten lunch in 
i poor mn on the mek\ hill overlooking the Met tod 
had said that he had to come back once a year if only for 
the succulent coastal sancocho. The landlady was so im¬ 
pressed by the importance of her guest that she borrowed 
dishes and flatware from the distinguished house of the 
Campillo family. The General did not remember many 
details of that occasion, and neither he nor Jose Palacios 
was certain if coastal sancocho was the same as Venezuelan 
hervido. Nevertheless, General Carreno thought it was 
the same dish, and that they had in fact eaten it on the 
hill in the port, not during the river campaign, however, 
but when they were there three years earlier on the steam¬ 
boat. The General, more and more disquieted by the 
leaks in his memory, accepted Carreno*s version with 
humility. 

The luncheon for the grenadiers was set under the 
large almond trees in the patio of the Campillo family's 
seignorial home and served on wooden planks covered 
with plantain leaves instead of tablecloths. On the interior 
terrace overlooking the patio a splendid table was laid 
with rigorous formality in the English manner for the 
General, his officers, and a few guests. The lady of the 
house explained that the news from Mompox had taken 
them by surprise at four o’clock in the morning, and they 



The General in His Labyrinth 


had just had time to slaughter the fattest animal in their 
herds. There it was, cut into succulent pieces and cooked 
at a merry boil in great pots, along with all the fruits of 
the garden. 

The announcement that they had prepared a banquet 
for hint without first notifying him soured the General’s 
humor, and Jose Palacios had to call on his best arts as 
conciliator so that he would agree to disembark, but the 
hospitable atmosphere at the fiesta improved his mood. He 
had well-deserved praise for the good taste of the house 
and for the sweetness of the young girls in the family, 
who were modest and diligent and served the table of 
honor with old-fashioned grace. Above all he praised the 
fineness of the china and the quality of the silver, em¬ 
blazoned with the heraldic emblems of some house 
brought down by the fatality of modem times, but he 
ate with his own. 

The only unpleasantness was caused by a Frenchman 
who was living under the protection of the Campillo 
family and who attended the luncheon with an insatiable 
need to demonstrate before such notable guests his uni¬ 
versal knowledge regarding the enigmas of this life and 
the next. He had lost everything in a shipwreck, and with 
his entourage of assistants and servants he had occupied 
half the house for almost a year while he waited for un¬ 
certain assistance that was supposed ro come to him from 
New' Orleans. Jose J alacios learned that his name was 
Diodes Atlantique, but he could not determine either his 
field of knowledge or the nature of his mission to New 
Granada. Naked and with a trident in his hand, he would 
have been identical to King Neptune, and he had a well- 
established reputation in the town as a swinish boor. 


I 2 I 


But luncheon with the General moved him to come to 
the table bathed and with clean fingernails and dressed for 
the stifling heat of May as if it were the wintry salons of 
Paris, wearing a blue jacket with gold buttons and striped 
trousers in the outdated style of the Directorate. 

No sooner were the first greetings concluded than he 
embarked on an encyclopedic lecture in meticulous Span¬ 
ish. He stated that a classmate of his from the primary 
school in Grenoble had just deciphered the i Igyptian 
hieroglyphics after fourteen sleepless years, That corn 
did not originate in Mexico but in a region of Mesopo¬ 
tamia where fossils had been discovered that antedated 
the arrival of Columbus m the Antilles. That the As¬ 
syrians had obtained experimental proof of the influence 
of celestial bodies on disease. That contrary to the claims 
of a recent encyclopedia, the Greeks had possessed no 
knowledge of cats until 400 b.c. While he pontificated 
without mercy on these and many other matters, he made 
emergency pauses only to lament the cultural deficiencies 
of American cuisine. 

The General sat opposite him and paid him no more 
than the scant attention civility demanded, pretending to 
cat more than he really ate and not raising his eyes from 
the plate. From the start the Frenchman attempted to 
speak to him in his own language, and the General re¬ 
sponded in kind for the sake of courtesy but then re¬ 
turned without delay to Spanish. His patience that day 
surprised lose Laurencin Silva, who knew how the ab¬ 
solutism of Europeans exasperated him. 

The Frenchman addressed the various guests in a loud 
voice, even those sitting farthest from him, but it was 
evident he was interested only in the attention of the 








The General in His Labyrinth 


General. Then, leaping from rhe rooster to the burro, as 
he called it, he asked the General a direct question: What 
would be the one correct system of government suitable 
to the new republics' Without raising his eyes from the 
plate, the General asked in turn: 

“And what is your opinion?” 

“My opinion is that the example of Bonaparte is a good 
one not only for us but for the entire world,” said the 
Frenchman. 

“1 don’t doubt that you think so,” said the Genera] 
without hiding the irony, “Europeans believe that only 
what Europe invents is good for the entire universe, and 
anything else is detestable.” 

“It had been my understanding that Your Excellency 
advocated the monarchist solution,” said the Frenchman. 

The General raised his eyes for the first time. “Welt, 
don’t let it be your understanding anymore,” he said. “My 
brow will never be sullied by a crown.” He pointed at 
the group of his aides-de-camp, and concluded: 

“I have Irurbide there to remind me.” 

“Speaking of which,” said the Frenchman, “the state¬ 
ment you made when they shot his father the Emperor 
gave great encouragement to European monarchists.” 

“1 would not change a letter of what I said then,” said 
the General. “It amazes me that a man as ordinary as 
Irurbide could do such extraordinary things, but may 
God save me from his fate as He has saved me from his 
actions, although I know He will never save me from the 
same ingratitude.” 

Then he tried to temper his harshness and explained 
that the initiative for establishing a monarchical regime 
in the new republics had come from General lose An- 


12 3 


tonio Paez. ] he idea proliferated, driven by all manner 
of equivocal interests, and even he had come to think of it, 
hidden under the cloak of a presidency for life, as a des¬ 
perate formula for achieving and maintaining the integ¬ 
rity of America at any cost. But he soon realized how 
senseless it was, 

“With federalism the opposite occurs, ' he concluded, 
“It seems too perfect for our countries because it de¬ 
mands virtues and talents far superior to our own.' 

“In any case/' said the Frenchman, “it is not systems 
but their excesses that dehumanize history/ 1 

m 

"We know that speech by heart," said the General. 
"At bottom it's the stupidity of Benjamin Constant, the 
greatest pastry chef in Europe, who was against the Revo¬ 
lution and then for the Revolution, who fought against 
Napoleon and then was one of his courtiers, who often 
goes to bed republican and wakes up monarchist, or vice 
versa, and who has now established himself as the absolute 
repository of our truth by the act and grace of European 
arrogance.” 

"Constant's arguments against tyranny are very lucid," 
said the Frenchman. 

"Senor Constant, like a good Frenchman, is a fanatic 
for absolute interests,' said the General. "On the other 
hand. Abbot Pradt made the only lucid statement in that 
polemic when he pointed out that policy depends on 
where and when it is formulated. During the War to the 
Death I myself gave the order to execute eight hundred 
Spanish prisoners in a single day, including the patients in 
the hospital at La Guayra. Today, under the same circum¬ 
stances, my voice w'ould not tremble if gave the order 
again, and Europeans would not have the moral authority 





The General in His Labyrinth 


to reproach me, for if any history is drowned in blood, 
indignity, and injustice, it is the history of Europe.” 

The deeper he delved into his analysis in the great 
silence that seemed to take possession of the entire town, 
the more he fed the fire of his own rage. The Frenchman 
was thunderstruck and attempted to interrupt, but he 
cut him off with a wave of his hand. The General evoked 
the hideous slaughters of European history. On Saint 
Bartholomew’s Night the number of slain reached more 
than two thousand in ten hours. During the splendor of 
the Renaissance twelve thousand mercenaries in the pay 
of the imperial armies sacked and devastated Rome and 
cut the throats of eight thousand of its inhabitants. And 
the apotheosis; Ivan IV. Czar of all the Russias, who de¬ 
served the name 1 'he Terrible, exterminated the entire 
population of the cities between Moscow and Novgorod, 
and in Novgorod, in a single assault, massacred all twenty 
thousand inhabitants on the simple suspicion of a con¬ 
spiracy against him. 

"So stop doing us the favor of telling us what we should 
do," he concluded. "Don’t attempt to teach us how we 
should he, don't attempt to make us just like you, don't 
try to have us do well in twenty years what you have 
done so badly in two thousand.’’ 

He crossed i is cutlery on his plate, and for the first time 
he fixed his flaming eyes on the Frenchman; 

"Damn it, please let us have our Middle Ages in peace! " 

He was breathless, overcome by another attack of 
coughing. But when at last he could control it, there was 
nor a vestige of rage left in him. ! le turned toward Kid 
Campillo and favored him wirh his best smile. 








125 


“Pardon me, my dear friend," he said. “Such ravings 
were not worthy of so memorable a luncheon/' 

Colonel Wilson related this incident to a chronicler of 
the time, who did not take the trouble to record it. “The 
poor General’s case is closed/' he said. That was the fun¬ 
damental belief of all who saw him on his final journey, 
and perhaps that was why no one left a written record. 
Indeed, in the opinion of some of his companions, the 
General would have no place in history. 

The jungle was less dense after Zambrano, the towns 
became gayer and more colorful, and in some there was 
music in the streets for no reason at all. 1 he General 
stretched out in the hammock, trying to digest the French¬ 
man's impertinence with a peaceful siesta, but it was not 
easy to do. He could not stop thinking about him, and 
with Jose Palacios he lamented not having found the well- 
aimed sentences and invincible arguments that occurred 
to him only now, in the solitude of the hammock and 
with his adversary out of reach. Nevertheless, by night¬ 
fall he felt better, and he gave General Carreno instruc¬ 
tions that the government should try to improve the lot 
of the unfortunate frenchman. 

Most of the officers, enlivened by their proximity to the 
sea, which was becoming more and more evident in the 
heaving excitement of nature, loosened the reins on their 
natural high spirits by helping the oarsmen, hunting for 
alligators with bayonet harpoons, complicating the easiest 
tasks in order to find release for their excess energy in 
the toil of galley slaves. Jose Laurencio Silva, on the other 
hand, slept by day and worked by night whenever pos¬ 
sible because of his long-standing terror of developing 



The General in His Labyrinth 


cataracts and going blind, as did several members of his 
mother's family. He got up in darkness to learn how to 
be a useful blind man. During bouts of insomnia in the 
encampments, the General had often heard him at his 
artisan's work, saw ing boards from trees he had trimmed 
himself, assembling the pieces, muffling the hammer in 
order not to disturb others as they slept. In the full light 
of the following day it was difficult to believe that such 
artful cabinetry had been accomplished in the dark. On 
the night in Puerto Real, Jose Laurcncio Silva just had 
time to give the password to a sentry who was about to 
shoot him, thinking that someone was trying to slip 
through the darkness to the General’s hammock. 

Navigation was more rapid and serene, and the only 
mishap occurred when one of Commodore Eibers ships 
steamed past them, moving in the opposite direction, and 
its wake endangered the barges and capsized the one 
loaded with provisions. High on the hull one could read 
its name in large letters: The Liberator. The General 
looked at it, pensive, until the danger was past and the 
vessel disappeared from view, “The Liberator,” he mur¬ 
mured. Then, like someone turning the page, he said to 
himself: 

“To think I’m that man!" 

At night he lay awake in the hammock, while the oars¬ 
men wagered on who could identify the voices of the 
jungle: the capuchin monkeys, the cockatoos, the ana¬ 
conda. Then, out of the blue, one of them said that the 
Campillos had buried the English china, the Bohemian 
crystal, and the Holland linen tablecloths in the patio be¬ 
cause they were terrified of being infected by consump¬ 
tion. 


It was the first time that the General heart! this popular 
diagnosis, although it was already current up and down 
the river and would soon he repeated along the entire 
coast. Jose Palacios realized it had made an impression 
on him, for he stopped swaying in the hammock. After 
long reflection he said: 

"I ate with my own place setting." 
i lie next day they moored in rhe village of Tenerife to 
replace the provisions lost in rhe accident. I he General 
remained incognito on the barge, bur he sent Wilson to 
inquire after a French merchant whose last name was 
Lenoit, or Lenoir, and whose daughter Anita would be 
about thirty years old. Since the inquiries in Tenerife 
were unsuccess!ul, the General wanted them repeated in 
the neighboring towns of Guaitaro, Salamina, and El 
Pindn, until be was convinced the legend had no basis at 
ail in reality. 

w 

His interest was understandable, because for years he 
had been pursued from Caracas to Lima by insidious gos¬ 
sip regarding a reckless, illicit passion that had sprung 
up between him and Anita Lenoit while he was in Ten¬ 
erife during the river campaign. ;t troubled him, al¬ 
though he could do nothing to disprove it. First, because 
his father, Colonel Juan Vicente Bolivar, had also been 
obliged to undergo various proceedings and hearings be¬ 
fore the Bishop of San Mateo for alleged violations of 
women, some of whom were minors, and for the notoriety 
of his liaisons with many others in avid exercise of his 
droit du seigneur. Second, because during the river cam¬ 
paign he had been in Tenerife for only two days, insuf¬ 
ficient time for so tempestuous a love affair. Nevertheless, 
the legend prospered so well that in the Tenerife ceme- 


The General in His Labyrinth 


tery Senorita Anne Lenoit's tombstone was a place of 
pilgrimage for lovers until the end of the century. 

In the Generali entourage the discomfort Jose Maria 
Carreno experienced in the stump of his arm w as reason 
for cordial teasing. He felt the movements of his hand, 
the sense of touch in his fingers, the pain bad weather 
caused in bones he did not have. He had retained enough 
of a sense of humor to laugh at himself. On the other hand, 
he was disturbed by his habit of answering questions 
when he was asleep. He engaged in conversations on any 
subject with none of h is waking inhibitions, he revealed 
goals and frustrations he doubtless would have kept to 
himself had he been awake, and on one occasion he was 
accused, without any basis in fact, of betraying a mili¬ 
tary secret in his sleep. On the last night of the voyage, 
while Jose Palacios watched beside the General's ham¬ 
mock, he heard Carreno speaking in the bow of the 
barge: 

'‘Seven thousand eight hundred eighty-two/* 

"What are we talking about? 1 ' Jose Palacios asked him. 

"The stars/ 1 said Carreno. 

The General opened his eyes, convinced that Carreno 
was talking in his sleep, and sat up in the hammock to 
look through the window at the night. It was immense 
and radiant, and the bright stars filled the sky. 

"There must be ten rimes that number/' said the 
General. 

!ts the number I said/' replied Carreno, "plus two 
shooting stars that went by while I was counting/’ 

Then the General left the hammock and saw Carreno 
lying on his back in the prow, more awake than ever, his 
naked torso crisscrossed by a tangle of scars, counting 





129 


Stars with the stump of his arm. That was how they found 
him after the battle of Cerritos Blancos in Venezuela, 
covered with blood and cut to ribbons, and left for dead 
in the mud. He had suffered fourteen saber cuts, several 
of which caused him to lose his arm. Later he received 
more wounds in other battles. But his morale remained 
intact, and he teamed to be so dexterous with his left hand 

that he was famous not oniv for his ferocious swordsman- 

* 

ship but for his exquisite handwriting as well. 

“Not even stars escape the ruin of life, ' said Carreno. 
“There are fewer now- rhan there were eighteen years 

ft 

ago. 

“You're crazy," said the General. 

“No,"' said Carreno. “I’m old, but I refuse to believe it." 

"I’m eight long years older than you," said the Gen¬ 
eral. 

“I count two extra years for each wound," said Car¬ 
reno. “And so I’m older than everybody." 

"In that case Jose Laurencio must be the oldest," said 
the General, “wounded six times by bullet, seven by 
lance, and twice by arrow'." 

Carreno took offense and replied with disguised venom: 

"And you must be the youngest: not a scratch." 

It was not the first time the General heard that truth 
spoken as a reproach, but he did not seem to resent it 
in the mouth of Carreno, whose friendship had already 
been proved in the sorest trials. He sar beside him to help 
him contemplate the stars on the river. When Carreno 
spoke again after a long pause, he was deep in the abyss 
of sleep. 

“I refuse to accept that with this journey our life is 
ended," he said. 



The General in His Labyrinth 

“Lives don't end only with death/' said the General. 
“‘There are other ways, some even more honorable/ 1 

Carreno resisted. 

“ I here must be something we cm do/' he said, “Even 
if iris taking a good bath in purple verbena. And not just 
us: the whole liberating army.” 

On ills second trip to Paris the General had not yet 
heard of baths in purple verbena, the lantana blossom 
popular in his own country for conjuring a wav bad luck. 
It was Dr. Aimc Bonpland, Humboldts collaborator, who 
spoke to him with dangerous scientific seriousness about 
the virtues of those flowers. During the same period he 
met a venerable magistrate in the French Court of Justice 
who had been a young man in Caracas and who often 
appeared in the literary salons or Paris with his beautiful 
flowing hair and apostle's beard stained purple by the 
purifying baths. 

The General laughed at everything that smelled of 
superstition or supernatural artifice, at any cult contrary 
to the rational ism of Ins tutor, Simon Rodriguez, At that 
time he had just turned twenty, he was a recent and 
wealthy widower bedazzled by the coronation of Na¬ 
poleon Bonaparte, he had become a Mason, he would 
recite from memory his favorite pages in Rousseaus 
£mtle and La nouvelle Heloist\ which had been his bed¬ 
side reading for some time, and he had traveled by foot, 
led by his tutor and carrying a knapsack on his back, 
through almost all of Europe. On one of the hills, with 
Rome at their feet, Don Simon Rodriguez pronounced 
another of his high-sounding prophecies regarding the 
destiny of the Americas. I lis own vision was clearer, 

“What has to be done with those immigrant Spanish 


pricks is to kick them out of Venezuela/' he said. “And 
I swear 111 do it.” 

W hen at last he reached his majority and had control 
of his inheritance, he undertook the kind of life that the 
frenzied times and his high-spirited character demanded 
of him, and in three months he spent one hundred fifty 
thousand francs. He had the most expensive rooms in the 
most expensive hotel in Paris, two liveried servants, a car¬ 
riage drawn by white horses, a Turkish driver, and a 
different lover for every occasion, whether it was his 

m 

favorite table at the Cafe de Procope, the dances in Mont¬ 
martre, or his private box at the Opera, and he told any¬ 
one who would believe him that on a single unlucky 
night he had lost three thousand pesos at roulette. 

When he returned to Caracas he was still closer to 
Rousseau than to his own heart, and with shameless pas¬ 
sion he continued to reread the edition of La nouvdle 
Heloise that was beginning to fall apart in his hands. 
Nevertheless, a short while before the assassination at¬ 
tempt of September when be had more than honored 
his Roman vow, he interrupted Manuel a Saenz during 
her tenth reading of Emile because the book seemed abom¬ 
inable to him. “Nowhere have ! been so bored as in Paris 
in the year i 804,” he said to her then. On the other hand, 
while he was there he had thought himself not only happy 
but the happiest man in the world, and he had not colored 
his destiny with the auspicious waters of purple verbena. 

1 wenty-six years later, absorbed in the magic of the 
river, dying, in defeat, perhaps he wondered if he might 
not have the courage to say to hell with the oregano and 
sage leaves and bitter oranges of Jose Palacios' distracting 
baths, to follow Carreho’s advice and sink down into a 


The General in His Labyrinth 


redemptive ocean of purple verbena along with his armies 
of beggars, his useless glories, his memorable errors, the 
entire country. 

It was a night of vast silences, like those on the colossal 
estuaries of Los Llanos, whose resonance allowed you to 
hear intimate conversations several leagues away. Chris¬ 
topher Columbus had lived a moment like this one and 
had written in his diary: “All night I heard the birds fly¬ 
ing." For land was near after sixty-nine days at sea. The 
General heard them too. They began to fly past at about 
eight o’clock, while Carreno was sleeping, and an hour 
later there were so many overhead that the wind stirred 
by their wings was stronger than the wind. A short while 
later some immense fish, lost among the stars on the river 
bottom, began to swim under the barges, and they could 
detect the first gusts of the northeast's putrefaction, fhere 
was no need to see it in order to recognize the inexorable 
power this strange sensation of freedom inspired in their 
hearts, “Merciful God!” sighed the General. “We’ve ar¬ 
rived," And it was true. For there was the sea, and on the 
other side of the sea was the world. 






and so he was in Furbaco once again. In the same 
house with its shadowy rooms, its great lunar arches and 
floor-to-ceiling windows facing the graveled square, and 
the monastic patio where he had seen the ghost of Don 
Antonio Caballero y Gongora, Archbishop and Viceroy 
of New Granada, who on moonlit nights would seek relief 
from his many sins and insoluble trespasses by walking 
among the orange trees. In contrast to the prevalent hot 
and humid climate of the coast, the weather was cool and 
healthful in Furbaco since it was situated above sea level, 
and along the banks of its streams there were immense 
laurel trees with tentacular roots where the soldiers would 
lie down to rest in the shade. 

Two nights earlier they had reached Barranca Nueva, 
the longed-for end of the river journey, where they had 
to spend a sleepless night in a foul-smelling storage shed 
of cane and mud, surrounded by sacks of rice and heaps 
of untanned hides, because they had reserved no lodgings 
and the mules they had ordered in advance were not 
ready for them. As a consequence the General arrived in 


The General in His Labyrinth 

Turhaco drenched and aching, desperate for sleep bur not 
sleepy* 

They had not finished unloading, and the news of his 
arrival had already reached Cartagena de Indias, only six 
leagues away, where General Mariano i\ I until La, quarter* 
master general and military commander of the province, 
hjd prepared a public reception for the following day t 
But the General was in no mood for inopportune fiestas. 
He greeted those who waited in the rain for him along 
the Kings Highway with the warmth reserved for old 
friends, but he requested with the same openness that they 
leave him atone* 

In reality, regardless of how he struggled to disguise it, 
his condition was worse than his bad humor suggested, 
and day after day even his entourage could see the in* 
satiable decline* He could not master his soul. The color 
of his skin had gone from pale green to mortal yellow. 
He was feverish, and the pain in his head had become 
eternal. The local priest offered to send for a doctor, but 
he refused: “If I d listened to my doctors Td have been 
buried years ago.” He had arrived in Turbaco ready to 
continue on to Cartagena the next day, but in the course 
of the morning he was informed that no ship bound for 
Kurope w ? as in port and no passport had come for him in 
the last mail. Therefore he decided to stay and rest for 
three days. His officers rejoiced, not only for the sake of 
his body bur also because the first secret reports that 
arrived regarding the situation in Venezuela were not the 
most salutary for his soul. 

Nevertheless, he could not prevent his friends from 
shooting off rockets until they ran out of powder, or sta¬ 
tioning a corps of bagpipers near the house, who would 


‘35 


play until late that night. They also arranged for a troupe 
of black men and women from rhe neighboring marshes 
of Marialabaja, dressed as sixteenth-century European 
aristocrats, to perform with African artfulness their bur¬ 
lesques of Spanish court dances, because on his previous 
visit he had liked them so much that he had called them 
back severa times. Now he did not even glance at them. 

“Get that noisy mob out of here," he said. 

Viceroy Caballero y Gongora had built the house and 
lived in it for some three years, and the phantasmagorical 
echoes in its rooms were attributed to the spell of his soul 
in torment, i Tie General refused to return ro the bed¬ 
room he had used on his last visit, which he remembered 
as the room of nightmares because each night he slept 
there he dreamed over and over again until daybreak 
about a woman with illuminated hair who tied a red rib¬ 
bon around his neck until she woke him. He had the ham¬ 
mock hung instead from the metal rings in the drawing 
room, and he slept for a while without dreaming. The 
rain came down in torrents, and a group of children stood 
peering through the street windows to watch him sleep. 
One of them woke him with a whispered “Bolivar, Boli¬ 
var." He searched for him Through the mists of fever, and 
the boy asked: 

“Do you love me?" 

( he General assented with a tremulous smile, but then 
he ordered the chickens wandering through the house to 
be chased out, rhe children made to leave, and the win¬ 
dows closed, and he fell asleep again. When he awoke 
the second time it was still raining and Jose Palacios was 
preparing the mosquito netting for the hammock. 

“I dreamed a boy on the street was asking me strange 




The General in His Labyrinth 


questions through the window,” the General told him. 

He agreed to drink an infusion, the lirst in twenty-four 
hours, but he could not finish it. He lay down again in the 
hammock, victim of a dizzy spell, and for a long while he 
remained submerged in a cwjiight meditation, contem¬ 
plating the line of bats hanging from the ceiling beams. 
At last he sighed: 

“Were ready for a pauper's grave.” 

He had been so prodigal with the former officers and 
ordinary soldiers of the liberating army who told him 
their misfortunes all along the river that in Turbaco he 
had no more than a quarter of his travel funds left. It 
remained to be seen if the provincial government had 
enough money in its bartered treasury to cover the draft, 
or could at least negotiate it with a speculator. For his 
immediate accommodation in Europe he counted on the 
gratitude of England, for which he had done so many 
favors, “ I he English love me." he would say. For him, 
his servants, and his minimal entourage to live with the 
dignified decorum of his nostalgia, he counted on the 
dream of selling the Aroa Mines. Nevertheless, if he 
really wanted to leave, passage and travel expenses for 
him and his entourage were of immediate urgency, and 
the amount of cash he had on hand made it unthinkable. 
But he could not renounce his infinite capacity for illu¬ 
sion at the very moment he needed it most. On rhe con- 
rrary. Although he saw fireflies where there were none 
because of fever and rhe pain in his head, he overcame 
the somnolence that dulled his senses and dictated three 
letters to Fernando. 

The first was a heartfelt response to Field Marshal Su¬ 
cre's farewell, in which he said nothing about his illness 



"37 


although he often did so in situations where he was pressed 
for compassion, as he was that afternoon. The second 
letter was to Don Juan de Dios Amador, the Prefect of 
Cartagena, urging payment of the eight-thousand-peso 
draft from the provincial treasury. “I am in dire need of 
that money for my departure," he told him. His pica 
bore fruit, and before four days had passed he received a 
favorable reply and Fernando went to Cartagena for the 
money. The third was to the poet Jose Fernandez Madrid, 
the Colombian Minister to London, requesting that he 
pay a letter of credit on his behalf to Sir Robert Wilson 
and another to the Englishman Professor Joseph Lan¬ 
caster, who was owed twenty thousand duros for estab¬ 
lishing his innovative system of reciprocal education in 
Caracas. “My honor is involved in this matter,’' he told 
him. For he trusted that his long-standing case would be 
resolved very soon and that the mines would be sold. A 
useless effort: by the time the letter reached London, 
Minister Fernandez Madrid had died. 

Jose Palacios signaled for quiet to the officers shouting 
their disputes as they played cards in the interior gallery, 
but they continued to argue in whispers until the bells 
in the nearby church rower sounded eleven o’clock. A 
short while later the bagpipes and drums at the public 
fiesta stopped playing, the breeze from the distant sea 
blew away the dark clouds that had gathered again after 
the downpour in the afternoon, and rhe full moon caught 
fire in the patio filled with orange trees, 

Jose Palacios did not leave the General for a moment, 
for he had been in the hammock, delirious with fever, 
since nightfall. He prepared one of the usual potions and 
gave him a senna enema, hoping that someone with more 


The General in His Labyrinth 


authority would dare to suggest a doctor, but no one 
did. The Genera! barely dozed for an hour at dawn. 

That day General Mariano Mondlla came to visit him 
with a select group of his friends from Cartagena, among 
them the men known as the three Juans of the Bolivarist 
party: Juan Garcia del Rio, Juan de Francisco Martin, 
and Juan dc Dios Amador. The three were horrified at 
the sight of the body in torment that tried to sit up in the 
hammock and lacked the breath to embrace them all. They 
had seen him at the Admirable Congress, in which they 
had participated, and they could not believe he had de¬ 
teriorated so much in so short a rime. His bones were 
visible under his skin, and he could not focus his eyes. 
He must have been aware of the hot stench of his breath, 
for he was careful to speak from a distance and almost in 
profile. But what struck them most was the evidence that 
he had lost height, to the point where it seemed to General 
MonriUa when they embraced that he reached no higher 
than his waist. 

He weighed eighty-eight pounds and would weigh ten 
pounds less just before he died. His official height was 
one meter sixty-five centimeters, although his medical 
and military records did not always agree, and on the 
autopsy tabic he would measure four centimeters less 
than that figure. His feet were as small as his hands in rela¬ 
tion to his body, and they too seemed smaller. Jose Pa¬ 
lacios had noted that he wore his trousers almost around 
his chest and had to turn back his shirt cuffs. The General 
observed his visitors' curiosity and admitted that the boots 
he always wore, a French size thirty-five, had been too 
big for him since January. General Montilla, famous for 


1 39 


his flashes of wit even in the least opportune situations, 
put an end to the poignancy. 

“The important thing," he said, “is that Your Excel¬ 
lency doesn't shrink on the inside." 

As always, he underscored his own humor with up¬ 
roarious laughter. The General gave him in return the 
smile of an old comrade and changed the subject. The 
weather had improved and was fine for a conversation 
outdoors, but he preferred to receive his visitors sitting 
in the hammock in the same room where he had slept. 

Their main topic was the state of the nation. The 
Cartagena Bolivarists refused to recognize the new con¬ 
stitution and the chosen leaders on the pretext that San- 
tanderist students had exerted unacceptable pressure on 
Congress, On the other hand, the loyal military had re¬ 
mained on the sidelines, by order of the General, and 

w 

the rural clergy that supported him had not had the op¬ 
portunity to mobilize. General Francisco Carmona, com¬ 
mander of a garrison in Cartagena and a man loval to his 
cause, had been about to instigate an insurrection and 
still threatened to do so. The Genera! asked Montilla to 
send Carmona to see him, so he could attempt to pacify 
him. Then, addressing them all but not looking at anyone, 
he gave them a brutal synthesis of the new government: 

“Mosquera is an asshole and Caycedo is a pastry chef, 
and both of them are scared shitless by the boys from San 
Bartolomei 

What he was saying in Caribbean was that the Presi¬ 
dent was a weakling and the Vice-President an oppor¬ 
tunist capable of changing parry depending on how the 
wind blew. He also pointed out with the sourness typical 



The General in His Labyrinth 


of his worst times that it was not at ail strange that each 
of them was a cleric’s brother. Yet the new constitution 
seemed better than anyone could have expected at a his¬ 
torical moment when the danger was not electoral defeat 
but the civil war that Santander was fomenting with his 
letters from Paris. In Popayan the President-elect had 
made repeated calls for order and unity but still had not 
said if he would accept the presidency. 

“He's waiting for Caycedo to do the dirty work,” said 
the General. 

“Masquers must be in Santa Fe dc Bogota by now," 
said Montilla. "He left Popayan on Monday." 

The General had not known, but he was not surprised, 
"You’ll see: he’ll collapse like a rotten squash when the 
time comes for action," he said. “That man couldn't do 
the porter’s work in a government." He fell into deep 
thought and was overcome by sadness. 

“Too bad," he said. “Sucre was the man.’’ 

“The worthiest of the generals," said de Francisco 
Martin, smiling. 

By now the phrase was famous throughout the country 
despite the General’s efforts to prevent its circulation. 

“Urdaneta’s brilliant phrase," joked Montilla. 

The General ignored the interruption and made ready 
to hear the secrets of local politics, more in jest than in 
a serious way, but then without warning Montilla rees¬ 
tablished the solemnity he liimself had just broken. "You’ll 
forgive me, Excellency,” he said, "you know better than 
anyone my devotion to the Field Marshal, but he is not 
the man.” And he concluded with theatrical emphasis: 

“You are.” 

The General cut him off on the spot: 


“I don't exist/* 

Then, taking up the thread, he recounted the manner 
in which Field Marshal Sucre resisted his pleas to accept 
the presidency of Colombia. “He has everything to save 
us from anarchy/’ he said, “but he allowed himself to be 
charmed by the sirens’ song." Garcia del Rio thought 
the real reason was that Sucre had an absolute lack of 
vocation for power. The General did not think this was 
an insurmountable obstacle. “In the long history of hu¬ 
manity it has often been shown that vocation is the legiti¬ 
mate child of necessity/ he said. In any case, these long¬ 
ings came too lace* because he knew as no one else did 
that the worthiest general in the Republic now belonged 
to forces less ephemeral than his own. 

f’he greatest power lies in the force of love/’ he said, 
and he concluded his gibe: “Sucre himself said so / 1 

While the General was reminiscing about him in Tur- 
baco, Field Marshal Sucre was leaving Santa Fc de Bo- 
goti ,r or Quito, disenchanted and alone, hut in the prime 
of his age and health and at rite height of his glory. His 
last piece of business the night before he left was a secret 
visit to a well-known fortune-teller in the Egyptian dis¬ 
trict who had guided him in several of his wartime enter¬ 
prises, and she had seen in the cards that even during the 
stormy season the most favorable routes for him were 
still by sea. The Field Marshal of Ayacucho thought they 
were too slow for his urgent love, and he risked the haz¬ 
ards of land against the good judgment of the cards. 

“So there's nothing to be done/' concluded the Gen¬ 
eral “We’re so screwed up, our best government is the 
worst/* 

He knew his local supporters. ITtey had been illustri- 


The General in His Labyrinth 


ous heroes who had performed great deeds in the struggle 
for liberation, but in political affairs they were petty 
traffickers in jobs and man-eating schemers who had even 
gone as far as forming alliances with Montilla against 
him. As he did with so many others, he gave them no 
peace until he had succeeded in charming them. And 
then he asked them to support the government, even at 
the expense of their personal interests. His reasoning, as 
usual, had a prophetic air: Tomorrow, when he was no 
longer there, the same government he was asking them 
to support would call back Santander, who would return, 
crowned with glory, to eradicate the wreckage of his 
dreams, and the immense, unified nation he had forged 
during so many years of wars and sacrifices would break 
apart, factions would divide it among themselves, and in 
the memory of the centuries his name would be vilified 
and his work distorted. But none of that mattered to him 
now if he could at least prevent more bloodshed. “Insur¬ 
rections, like the waves of the sea, come one after the 
other," he said. "That’s why I've never liked them.” And 
to the amazement of his visitors, he concluded: 

“Believe it or not, these days I even deplore the one 
we made against the Spanish." 

General Montilla and his friends felt he had come to 
his end. Before they said goodbye he gave them each a 
gold medal engraved w ith his likeness, and they could 
not avoid the impression that it was a posthumous gift. 

As they w alked to the door Garcia del Rio said in a low 

* 

voice: 

"He has the face of a dead man." 

The words, amplified and repeated by the echoes in 
the house, pursued the General a!! night. Nevertheless, 


*43 


the next day General Francisco Carmona was surprised 
at how well he looked. He found him in the patio per¬ 
fumed by orange blossoms, m a hammock with his name 
embroidered on it in silk thread, w hich had been made 
for him in the neighboring town of San Jacinto and 
which Jose Palacios had hung between two orange trees. 
He had just bathed, his hair was pulled back, and he wore 
a blue tunic without a shirt, which lent him an air of in¬ 
nocence. As he swayed very slow ly; he dictated an indig¬ 
nant letter for President Cayeedo to his nephew Fernando. 
He did not seem as moribund to Genera! Carmona as 
they had said, perhaps because he was intoxicated by one 
of his legendary rages. 

Carmona was too visible to pass unnoticed anywhere, 
yet the General looked at him but did not sec him as he 
dictated a sentence attacking the perfidy of his detrac¬ 
tors. Only when he had completed it did he turn toward 
the giant who stood looking at him without blinking, his 
whole body facing the hammock, and ask with no pre¬ 
liminary greeting: 

"And do you think Vm an instigator of insurrections 
too?** 

General Carmona, anticipating a hostile reception, 
asked with a touch of arrogance: 

“Where does the General get that idea?” 

“From the same place they do,” he said, 

l ie handed him the news clippings he had just received 
in the mail from Santa I ’e de Bogota, which accused him 
once again of having instigated in secret the rebellion of 
the grenadiers in order to return to power despite the 
decision of Congress, “What vile trash/’ he said, "W hile 
I waste mv time preaching union, these half-baked im- 


The General in His Labyrinth 

beciles accuse me of conspiracy.” General Carmona suf¬ 
fered a certain disillusionment when he read the clippings. 

“Well, I not only believed it,” he said, "I was delighted 
to think it was true.” 

“I can imagine,” said the General. 

He showed no signs of irritation but asked him to wait 
while he finished dictating the letter, in which he again 
requested official permission to leave the country. When 
he finished he had recovered his composure with the same 
sudden ease he had shown in losing it w hen he read the 
newspapers. He stood up without help and took General 
Carmona by the arm for a stroll around the cistern. 

After three days of rain, the light was a gold powder 
that filtered through the leaves of the trees and moved 
the birds ro sing among the orange blossoms. The Gen¬ 
eral listened for a moment, heard them in his soul, and 
almost sighed: “At least they still sing.” He gave General 
Carmona an erudite explanation of why birds in the An¬ 
tilles sing better in April than in June, and then, with no 
transition, he returned to the business at hand. He needed 
no more than ten minutes to convince him to respect 
without conditions the authority of the new government. 
Afterw ards he accompanied Carmona to the door, and 
then he went to the bedroom to write in his own hand 
to Manuda Saenz, who continued to complain about the 
obstacles the government was placing in the way of her 
letters. 

1-le did no more than taste the cornmeal mush that 
Fernanda Barriga brought to the bedroom while he was 
writing. At siesta he asked Fernando to continue reading 
aloud the book on Chinese bout meats they had begun the 
night before. A short w hile later Jose Palacios came into 


'45 


the room with oregano water for the warm bath ami 
found Fernando asleep on the chair with the open book 
on his lap. The General was awake in the hammock, and 
he placed his index finger over his lips to signal quiet. 
For the first time in two weeks he had no fever. 

In this way. marking rime between one mail and the 
next, he spent twenty-nine days in Turbaco. He had been 
there twice before but appreciated its medicinal virtues 
only on the second visit, three years earlier, when he 
was returning from Caracas to Santa Fe de Bogota in 
order to thwart Santander's separatist plans. On that occa¬ 
sion the climate had agreed w’ith him so well that he 
stayed ten days instead of the two nights he had planned. 
They were days filled with patriotic fiestas. At the end 
there was a gala bullfight, despite his ad version to such 
spectacles, and he himself faced a heifer that tore the cape 
from his hands and brought a shout of fear from the 
crowd. Now, on the third visit, his painful destiny was 
fulfilled, and the passage of the days confirmed this to a 
maddening degree. The rains became more frequent and 
more desolate, and life w r as reduced to waiting for news 
of further reversals. One night, in rhe lucidity of ad¬ 
vanced insomnia, he was heard by iose Palacios as he 
sighed in the hammock: 

"God knows where Sucre can be!" 

General Montilla had returned twice and found him 
much better than he had been on the first day. Further¬ 
more, it seemed to him that little by little the General 
was recovering his old drive, above all because of rhe 
insistence with which he complained that his supporters 
in Cartagena had not yet voted for the new constitution 
or recognized the new government, as had been agreed on 




The General in His Labyrinth 


the previous visit* General Montilla invented the excuse 
that they were waiting to find out if Joaquin Mosquera 
would accept the presidency. 

“They'll be in a better position if they do it before¬ 
hand,' 1 said the General. 

On the next visit he complained with even greater 
energy, for he had known Mantilla since they were boys 
and realized that the resistance he attributed to others 
was in fact his own. Not only were they bound by a 
friendship based on class and profession, but they had 
spent their lives in common as well. At one time their 
relations cooled to the point where they stopped speak¬ 
ing to each other because Mon til la left the General with¬ 
out reinforcements in Mompox, at one of the most danger¬ 
ous moments in the war, and the General accused him of 
both moral degeneracy and res[>onsibility for all his ca¬ 
lamities, Mon til la’s reaction was so impassioned that he 
challenged the General to a dud, but he continued to serve 
the cause of independence despite personal animosities. 

He had studied mathematics and philosophy at the 
Military Academy in Madrid and had been a personal 
bodyguard to King Fernando Vll until the day the first 
new s of Venezuelan emancipation reached him. He was 
a good conspirator in Mexico, 3 good arms smuggler in 
Curagao, and a good fighter everywhere from the time 
he was first wounded, at the age of seventeen. In 1821 he 
rid the coast of Spaniards from Riohacha to Panama and 
rook Cartagena from a larger and better-equipped army. 
Then he offered reconciliation to the General with a 
gallant gesture: he sent him the gold keys of the city, 
which the General returned along with his promotion to 
the rank of brigadier general and orders to take over the 






>47 


government of the coast, f It was not a well-loved gov¬ 
ernor, although he tended to mitigate his excesses with 
a sense of humor. His house was the best in the city, his 
hacienda, Aguas Vivas, was one of the most desirable in 
the province, and in broadsides on the walls the people 
asked where he got the money to buy them. But after 
eight years of a difficult and solitary exercise of power 
he was still governor, having become an astute politician, 
difficult to oppose. 

Monrilla replied to each insistent complaint with a 
different argument. Nevertheless, at one point he cold 
the unadorned truth: The Bolivarists in Cartagena were 
resolved not to sw’ear to a compromise constitution or 
recognize a weak government w hose origins lay not in 
harmony but in widespread discord. This was typical of 
local politicians, w'hose disagreements had been the cause 
of great historical tragedies. “And they are not mistaken 

if Your Excellency, the most liberal of us all, leaves us 

¥ 

at the mercy of men who have appropriated the name 
liberal in order to destroy your work/’ said Monrilla, 
And therefore the only way to settle matters was for the 
General to remain in the country and prevent its dis¬ 
integration, 

‘Fine, If that’s the case, tell Carmona to come back 
and well persuade him to revolt/ 1 replied the General 
with characteristic sarcasm. lt Ir won t be as bloody as 
the civil war the Canagenans are going to provoke with 
their insolence.” 

But before he said goodbye to Monrilla he had regained 
his composure, and he asked him to bring the leaders 
of his party to Turbaco to air their objections* He was 
still waiting for them when General Carreno arrived 



The General in His Labyrinth 


with the news that Joaquin Mosqucra had assumed the 
presidency. 

He slapped his forehead. “Fuck it!” he exclaimed. “I 
won’t believe it until I see it with my own eyes." 

That same afternoon General Montilla went to confirm 
the report in person, in a downpour with crosswinds that 
uprooted trees, devastated half the town, destroyed the 
house's farmyard, and swept away the drowned animals. 
But it also softened the blow of the bad news. The of¬ 
ficial escort, in an agony of tedium in the empty days, 
prevented the disaster from becoming worse. Monrilla 
threw on a battlefield tain cape and directed rescue op¬ 
erations, The General sat on a rocking chair in front of 
the window, wrapped in the sleeping blanket, his look 
thoughtful and his respiration calm, contemplating the 
torrent of mud that carried along the wreckage left by 
the disaster. Those Caribbean disturbances had been fa¬ 
miliar to him since he was a boy. Nevertheless, while 
the troops hurried to reestablish order in the house, he 
told Jose Palacios that he could not remember seeing 
anything like it. When at last calm was restored, .Man¬ 
tilla came into the room, dripping water and muddied up 
to his knees. The General was still intent on his idea. 

“Well, Monti lla," he said. “Mosqucra is President now, 
and Cartagena still hasn't recognized him." 

Monti! la would not allow storms to distract him either. 

“If Your Excellency were in Cartagena it would be 
much easier," he said. 

There's the danger it would be interpreted as inter¬ 
ference by me. and I don’t want to be the protagonist 
of anything," he S3id. “Furthermore, ’m not moving 
from here until this matter is resolved." 



>49 


That night he wrote a letter of support to General 
Mosquera. "I have just learned, with no surprise, that you 
accepted the presidency, which makes me happy for the 
country and for myself," he told him. “But I regret it, and 
will always regret it, for your sake." And he ended the 
letter with a sly postscript: “I have not left because my 
passport has not arrived, but I am leaving without fail 
when it does,” 

On Sunday' General Daniel Florencio O’Leary arrived 
in Turbaco and joined the entourage. He was a prominent 
member of the British Legion, who for some time had 
been an aide-de-camp and a bilingual secretary to the 
General. Monritla, in a better humor than ever, had ac¬ 
companied him from Cartagena, and they and the Gen¬ 
eral spent a pleasant afternoon as old friends under the 
orange trees. At the end of a long conversation with 
O’Leary concerning his military career, the General asked 
his favorite question: 

"And what are people saying?" 

"That it isn't true you’re leaving," said O’Leary. 

“Aha," said the General. “Why not this time?” 

"Because Manuelira is staying behind." 

The Genera! responded with disarming sincerity: 

"But she's always stayed behind!” 

O'Leary, a close friend of Manuela Saenz, knew the 
General was right, ft was true she always stayed behind, 
not because she wanted to but because the General would 
leave her on any pretext in a foolhardy effort to escape 
the servitude of formalized love. “I’ll never fall in love 
again," he once confessed to lose Palacios, the only hu¬ 
man being with whom he ever permitted himself that 
son of confidence. "It’s like having two souls at the same 


The General in His Labyrinth 


rime.” Manuela asserted herself with a determination that 
could not be contained and with none of the hindrances 
of dignity, but the more she attempted to conquer him, 
the more eager the General seemed to free himself from 
her chains. It was a love of perpetual flight. In Quito, 
after their first two weeks of passionate love, he had to 
rravel to Guayaquil for a meermg with General Jose de 
San Martin, the liberator of Rio de la Plata, and she 
stayed behind, asking herself what kind of lover left the 
table in the middle of the meal. 1 fe had promised to write 
every day, everywhere he went, so that he could swear 
with all his heart that he loved her more than he had ever 
loved anyone else in this world. He did write to her, in 
fact, and sometimes in his own hand, but he did not send 
the letters, In the meantime he consoled himself in a mul¬ 
tiple idyll with the five indistinguishable women of the 
Garaycoa matriarchy, never knowing for certain if he 
had chosen the grandmother of fifty-six, the daughter 
of thirty-eight, or the three granddaughters in the flower 
of their yourh. When his mission in Guayaquil was over, 
he escaped from them all with promises of eternal love 
and a prompt return, and he went back to Quito to sink 
into the quicksands of Manuela Saenz. 

Early the following year he left her again, to complete 
the liberation of Peru, which was the final enterprise of 
his dream. Manuela waited four months, but she set sail 
for Lima as soon as letters began to arrive that not only 
were written by Juan lose Santana, the General’s private 
secretary, which was not unusual, but were thought and 
felt by him as well. She found him in the pleasure palace 
of La Magdalena, invested with dictatorial powers by the 
Congress and besieged by the beautiful bold women of 



the new republican court. I he Presidential Palace was 
so disorderly that a colonel of the lancers had moved out 
one midnight because the agonies of love in the bedrooms 
did not let him sleep. But Manuela was now in territory 
that she knew all too well. She had been born in Quito, 
the illegitimate daughter of a wealthy American land¬ 
owner and a married man, and at the age of eighteen she 
had jumped out the window of the convent where she 
was a student and run off with an officer in the king s 
array. Nevertheless, two years later she was married in 
Lima, and with a virgin's orange blossoms, to Dr* James 
Thorne, a complaisant physician who was twice her age. 
And therefore, when she returned to Peru in pursuit of 
the love of her life, she did not need lessons from anyone 
on how to hold her own in the midst of scandal 

O'Leary was her best aide-de-camp in these battles of 
the bean. At first Manuela did not live at La Magdalena, 
but she came and went as she pleased, through the mam 
door and with military honors. Astute and indomitable, 
she had irresistible grace, a sense of power, and unbounded 
tenacity. She spoke good English because of her husband, 
as w ell as an elementary but comprehensible Trench, and 
she played the clavichord in the sanctimonious style of 
novices. Her handwriting was difficult ro read, her syntax 
impassable, and she would convulse with laughter at what 
she called her orthographical horrors. The General named 
her curator of his archives in order to keep her near him, 
and this made it easy for them to make love anytime, 
anywhere, surrounded by the clamor of the wild Ama¬ 
zonian animals that Manuela tamed with her charms. 

Nevertheless, when the Genera! began the conquest 
of the difficult territories of Peru, which w ere still in the 


The General in His Labyrinth 


hands of the Spanish, Manueia could not persuade him 
to take her along as a member of his general staff. She 
followed him without his permission, with her trunks 
worthy of a first lady, the chests filled with archives, and 
her court of slavewomen, in a rear guard of Colombian 
troops who adored her for her barracks language. She 
traveled three hundred leagues on the back of a mule 
along the dizzying precipices of the Andes, and in four 
months she managed to spend only two nights with the 
General, one of them because she succeeded in frighten¬ 
ing him with a suicide threat. Some time went by before 
she learned that while she could not be with him, he con¬ 
soled himself with other, transitory loves that he found 
along the way. Among them was Manuelita Madrono, an 
untamed eighteen-year-old mulatta who sanctified his 
bouts of insomnia. 

After her return from Quito, Manueia decided to leave 
her husband, whom she described as an insipid L nglish- 
man who loved without pleasure, conversed without wit, 
walked without haste, greeted people with bows, sat down 
and stood up with caution, and did not laugh even at his 
own jokes. But the General convinced her to preserve at 
all costs the privileges of her legal status, and she acceded 
to his wishes. 

A month after the victory at Ayacucho, when he was 
master of half the world, the General left for Alto Peru, 
which would later become the Republic of Bolivia. He 
not only left without Manueia, but before leaving sug¬ 
gested as a matter of state the advantage of 3 definitive 
separation. “1 see that nothing can unite us under the 
auspices of innocence and honor," he wrote to her. "In 
the future you will be alone, although at your husband’s 


1 5 3 


side, and I will be alone in the midst of the world. The 
glory of having conquered ourselves will be our only 
consolation.’" Before three months had passed he received 
a letter in which .Manuela announced her departure for 
London with her husband. The news found him in the 
alien bed of Francises Zubiaga dc Gamarra, a spirited 
woman of action married to a field marshal who would 
later be President of the Republic. The General did not 
wait for the second lovemaking of the night to wrire an 
immediate reply to Manuela that seemed more like an 
order in battle: “Tell the truth and don't go anywhere."’ 
And with his own hand he underlined the last sentence: 
"My love for you is steadfast." She obeyed, delighted. 

Ihc General’s dream began to fall apart on the very 
day it was realized. No sooner had he founded Bolivia and 
concluded the institutional reorganization of Peru than 
he had to hurry back to Santa Fe de Bogota, spurred by 
General Paez" first separatist attempts in Venezuela and 
Santander’s political intrigues in New Granada. On this 
occasion Manuela had a longer wait until he allowed her 
to follow him, but when at last he did she traveled in a 
caravan worthy of Gypsies, with her trunks on the backs 
of a dozen mules, her immortal slavewomcn, and eleven 
cats, six dogs, three monkeys educated in the art of palace 
obscenities, a bear trained to thread needles, and nine 
cages of parrots and macaws that railed against Santander 
in three languages. 

She arrived in Santa Fc de Bogota just in time to save 
the little life remaining to the General on the evil night 
of September 25. Six years had gone by since they had 
met, but he was as aged and full of doubt as if it had been 
fifty, and Manuela had the impression that he was wan- 




The General in His Labyrinth 


dering without direction through the mists of solitude. 
He would return to the south a short while later to curb 
the colonial ambitions of Peru in Quito and Guayaquil, 
but by that time all his efforts were in vain. On this occa¬ 
sion Manuela stayed behind in Santa Fc de Bogota with¬ 
out the least desire to follow' him, for she knew that her 
eternal fugitive no longer had a place to escape to. 

In his memoirs O’Leary observed that the General had 
never been so willing to recall his furtive loves as on that 
Sunday afternoon in ! urbaco. Montilla thought at the 
time, and wrote years later in a private letter, that this was 
an unmistakable symptom of old age. Encouraged by the 
General's good humor and confidences, Montilla could 
not resist the temptation of a cordial provocation. 

“Was Manuela the only one who stayed behind?" he 
asked. 

! hey all stayed behind." said the Genera! with com¬ 
plete seriousness. “But Manuela more rhan any of them.” 

Montilla winked at O Leary and said: 

“Confess, General: how many were there?” 

The General eluded him. 

“Many fewer than you think," he said. 

That night, while he was in the warm bath, Jose Pa¬ 
lacios tried to clarify matters for him. “According to my 
calculations there were thirty-five,” he said. “Not count¬ 
ing the one-night birds, of course.' I he figure matched 
the General’s own calculations, but he had not wanted 
to say so during the visit. 

“O'Leary is a great man, a great soldier, and a faithful 
friend, but he takes notes on everything,” he explained. 
“And there’s nothing more dangerous than a written 
memoir.” 



*55 


The next day, after a Song private interview held to 
inform him of conditions on the border, he asked O'Leary 
to go to Cartagena for the formal purpose of bringing 
him up-to-date on the movement of ships bound for 
Europe, although the real mission was to keep him advised 
regarding the hidden details of local politics. No sooner 
had O'Leary arrived than, on Saturday, June iz, the 
Cartagena Congress swore loyalty to the new constitu¬ 
tion and recognized the chosen officials, Monti 11a sent the 
General an inevitable message along with the news: 

“WeVc waiting for you,” 

He was still waiting when a rumor that the General 
had died made him leap out of bed* He rode to l urbaco 
at full gallop, not taking time to confirm the report, and 
there he found the General better than ever, lunching 
with a Frenchman, the Count de Raigecourt, who had 
come with an invitation that they travel together to Eu¬ 
rope on an English packet boat arriving in Cartagena the 
following week* It was the culmination of a salubrious 
day for the General, who had decided to confront his 
poor health with moral fortitude, and no one could say 
he had not been successful He had awakened early, 
walked through the farmyards it milking time, visited 
the grenadiers in their barracks, listened to them as they 
spoke about their living conditions, and given categorical 
orders to improve them* On his way back he stopped at 
an in n in the market, drank some coffee, and took the 
cup with him to avoid the humiliation ot their destroying 
it* He was walking toward his house when he turned a 
corner and the children leaving school ambushed him, 
singing and clapping in rhythm: “Long live The Lib¬ 
erator! Long live The Liberator!" He was bewildered 



The General in His Labyrinth 


and would not have known what to do if the children 
themselves had not made way for him. 

At his house he found the Count de Raigecourt, who 
had arrived unannounced in the company of the most 
beautiful, elegant, and haughty woman he had ever seen. 
She wore riding clothes, although in reality they had 
come in a chaise drawn by a burro. All she revealed of 
her identity was that her name was Camille and that she 
was a native of Martinique. The Count gave no addi¬ 
tional information, although in the course of the day it 
would become far too evident that he was mad with love 
for her. 

i he mere presence of Camille revived the General's 
high spirits of other days, and he lost no time in ordering 
a gala luncheon. Although the Count spoke correct Span¬ 
ish. conversation was carried on in French, which was 
Camille's language. When she said she had been bom in 
Trois-Tlets, he gestured with enthusiasm and his faded 
eyes flashed. 

"Ah,” he said. “Where Josephine was born.” 

She laughed. 

“Please, Excellency, I was hoping for a more intelligent 
observation than the one everybody else makes." 

He indicated that he was wounded and defended him¬ 
self with a lyrical evocation of La Pagerie Plantation, the 
birthplace of Marie-Jnsephe, Empress of France, which 
was visible at a distance of severat leagues across the vast 
canehrakes and through the clamor of the birds and the 
hot smell from the distilleries. She was surprised that the 
General knew it so well. 

" The truth is I've never been rhere or anywhere else 
on Martinique," he said. 




1 57 


14 Et alors?" she said* 

44 1 prepared and spent years learning about it/' said 
the General, “because I knew I would need it one day 
in order to please the most beautiful woman from those 
islands." 

He was dressed in embossed cotton trousers, a satin 
tunic, and red slippers, and he spoke without pause, his 
voice broken but eloquent. She noticed the breath of 
cologne floating Through the dining room* He confessed 
it was a weakness of his, to the point where his enemies 
accused him of having spent eight thousand pesos of pub¬ 
lic funds on cologne* He was as weak as he had been the 
day before, but only his meager body betrayed the se¬ 
verity of his illness. 

In the company of men the Genera! was capable of 
swearing like the most shameless horse thief, but the mere 
presence of a woman was enough to refine his manners 
and language to the point of affectation* He himself un¬ 
corked, decanted, and served a grande classe Burgundy 
that the Count described without hesitation as a velvet 
caress* ITiey were serving the coffee when Captain Itur* 
bide whispered something in his ear* He listened with 
utmost gravity, but then he leaned back in his chair and 
laughed out loud. 

“Listen to this, please," he said. “A delegation from 
Cartagena has arrived for my funeral" 

He had them come in* Montilla and his companions had 
no other recourse than to go along with his joke. The 
aides-de-camp called in the bagpipers from San Jacinto 
who had been in the vicinity since the previous night, and 
a group of old men and women danced the cumhia in 
honor of the guests* Camille was amazed at the elegance 




The General in His Labyrinth 


of thac folk dance of African origin, and she wanted to 
learn it. The General had a reputation as a fine dancer, 
and some of his dining companions remembered that on 
his last visit he had danced the cumbm like a master, but 
when Camille asked him to join her, he declined the 
honor. “Three years is a long time,” he said, smiling. 
She danced alone after she was shown rwo or three steps. 

hen, when the music stopped for a moment, they heard 
sudden cheering, a scries of fearful explosions, and the 
sound of gunfire. Camille was frightened. 

The Count said in all seriousness: 

“Damn it, it’s a revolution!" 

“You can’t imagine how' much we need one.” i he 
General laughed. “Sad to say, it’s only a cockfight.” 

Almost without thinking about it, he finished his coffee 
and with a circular gesture of his hand invited all of them 
to the cockpit. 

"Come w'ith me, Montilla, so you can see how dead I 
am,” he said. 

And so at two o'clock in the afternoon he visited the 
cockpit, accompanied by a large group with the Count 
de Raigccourt in the lead. But in that kind of gathering, 
composed only of men, everyone noticed Camille, not the 
General. No one could believe that so dazzling a wrnman 
u f as not one of his many lovers, and in a place forbidden 
to U'omen. above all when they were told she had come 
U'ich the Count, for it was w-ell known that the General 
had other men accompany his clandestine lovers in order 
to cloud the truth. 

I he second fight was horrifying. A red cock scratched 
out his opponent’s eyes with a pair of well-aimed spurs. 
But the blinded one did not surrender. He attacked the 



1 59 


other cock in ferocious rage until he tore off his head and 
ate it with great pecks of his bill. 

I never inlagined a fiesta could be so bloody/’ said 
Camille, “But I love it.” 

The General explained that it was even bloodier when 
the audience provoked the roosters with obscene shouts 
and fired their weapons in the air* bur that afternoon they 
were inhibited by the presence of a woman, above all one 
so beautiful He gave her a flirtatious look and said: 11 And 
so the fault is yours/' She laughed in amusement: 

“It s yours, Excellency, for having governed this coun¬ 
try for so many years and not making a law that would 
require men to behave the same whether there are women 
present or not/' 

He began to lose his patience* 

4 i beg you not to call me Excellency/' he said* “I'm 
satisfied with being reasonable/' 

Thar night, as he was floating in the futile water of the 
bath, lose Palacios said: “She's the best-looking woman 
we’ve seen/' The General did not open his eyes. 

“She s abominable/' he said. 

His appearance in the cockpit, according to widespread 
opinion, was a premeditated action taken to counteract 
the differing versions of his illness, which had become so 
serious in recent days that no one doubted the rumor of 
his death. It had its effect, for the mail leaving Cartagena 
carried the news of his good health along various routes, 
and his followers celebrated with public fiestas that were 
more defiant than jubilant* 

The General had succeeded in deceiving even his own 
body, for his animation continued in the days that fol¬ 
lowed, and he permitted himself to sit again at the gam- 



The General in His Labyrinth 


ing tabic with his aides-de-camp, who whiled away the 
tedium with endless games of cards. Andres Ibarra, who 
was the youngest and most joyful and still preserved a 
romantic sense of war, had written during this time to a 
lover in Quito: “I prefer death in your arms to this peace 
without you." They played for days and nights on end, 
sometimes absorbed in the enigma of the cards, sometimes 
shouting their disagreements, and always pursued by the 
mosquitoes that during the rainy season assaulted them 
even in broad daylight, despite the dung fires the order¬ 
lies kept burning. He had not played since the evil night 
in Guaduas, for the harsh incident with Wilson had left 
a bitterness that he wanted to erase from his heart, but 
in the hammock he listened to their shouts, their con¬ 
fidences, their memories of war during the idleness of an 
elusive peace. One night he walked around the house a 
few rimes and could not resist the temptation to stop in 
the corridor. He signaled those facing him to keep quiet, 
and came up behind Andres Ibarra. As if they were fal¬ 
con’s claws, he placed a hand on each of his shoulders 
and asked: 

Jclt me something. Cousin: do you think I look like 
a dead man too?” 

Ibarra, accustomed to his ways, did not turn around to 
look at him, 

“Not me, General,” he said. 

“Well, either you're blind or you’re lying,’' he said. 

“Or mv back is turned." said Ibarra. 

/ 

I tie General became interested in the game, sac down, 
and after a while began to plaw For everyone it was like 
a return to normalcy, not only that night but on the 
following nights as well. While we Ye waiting for the 



passport,” as the General said. Nevertheless, Jose Pala¬ 
cios told him again that despite the ritual of the cards, 
despite his personal attention, despite himself, the officers 
of his entourage were sick to death of all their coming 
and going to nowhere. 

No one was more concerned than he for the fate of his 
officers, for the daily minutiae as well as the broad hori¬ 
zon of their destiny, but when problems had no solution 
he resolved them by deceiving himself. Ever since the 
incident with W ilson, and then all along the river, he had 
interrupted his own suffering to think about them. Wil¬ 
son's conduct was unspeakable, and only very deep frus¬ 
tration could have inspired such harshness. “He’s as good 
a soldier as his father,” the General had said when he 
saw him fighting at lunfn. “And more modest, he had 
added when Wilson refused rhe promotion to colonel 
granted him bv Field Marshal Sucre after the battle of 
Tarqui, which he had obliged him to accept. 

The regimen he imposed on all ot them, in peace as 
well as war, required not only heroic discipline but a 
loyalty that almost demanded clairvoyance. They were 
fighting men but not barracks soldiers, for they had fought 
so much they had almost not had tunc to make camp. 
There were all kinds of men among them, but the nucleus 
of those who won independence, the ones closest to the 
General, were the flower of American aristocracy, who 
had been educated in the schools of princes. They had 
spent their lives fighting, far from their homes, rheir wives, 
their children, far from everything, and necessity had 
turned them into politicians and officeholders. ! hey were 
all Venezuelans except Irurbidc and the L uropean aides- 
de-camp, and almost all of them were related to the Gen- 


The General in His Labyrinth 


cral by blood or by marriage: Fernando, Jose Laurencio, 
the Ibarras, Briceno Mendez. The links of class or blood 
identified and unified them. 

One was different from the rest: Jose Laurencio Silva 
was the son of a midwife from the town of El Tinaco, 
on Los Llanos, and a fisherman on the river. Through his 
father and his mother he was a dark-skinned member of 
the lower class of pardo half-breeds, but the General had 
married him to Felicia, anorher of his nieces. During his 
career he had risen from a sixteen-year-old volunteer in 
the liberating army to a field general at the age of fifty- 
eight, and he had suffered more than fifteen serious 
wounds and numerous minor ones, inflicted by a variety 
of weapons, in fifty-rwo battles in almost all the cam¬ 
paigns for independence. The only difficulty he encoun¬ 
tered as a pardo was his rejection by a lady of the local 
aristocracy during a gala ball, i he General then requested 
that they repeat the waltz, and he danced it with Silva 
himself. 

At the opposite extreme was General O’Leary, who 
was tail and blond and had an elegant appearance, en¬ 
hanced by his Florentine uniforms. He had come to Vene¬ 
zuela at the age of eighteen as a second lieutenant in the 
Red Hussars and spent his entire career fighting in almost 
all the battles of the wars for independence. He too, like 
the others, had suffered his moment of disgrace: when the 
General sent him to find a formula for reconciliation, he 
had agreed with Santander in the latter’s dispute with 
Jos6 Antonio Paez. The General refused to speak to him, 
leaving him to his fate for fourteen months, until his anger 
cooled. 



163 


The personal merits of each of them were undeniable. 
iTie difficulty was that the General was never conscious 
of the barricade of power that he himself maintained 
with them, which became even more insurmountable the 
more he thought he was being accessible and kind. But 
on the night when Jose Palacios made him see their state 
of mind, he played cards as an absolute equal, losing with 
good grace until the officers allowed themselves to ex¬ 
press their feelings. 

It was clear they were not burdened by old frustrations. 
They did not care about the sense of defeat that took hold 
of them even after winning a war. They did nut care 
about the slowness he imposed on their promotions to 
avoid the appearance of privilege, and they did not care 
about their uprooted, wandering life or the misfortunes 
of occasional love. Military salaries had been reduced by 
two thirds because of the nation’s financial straits, and 
still their pay was three months late, and then it was issued 
in government bonds of uncertain value, which they sold 
at a loss to speculators. Nevertheless, they did not care, 
as they did not care about the General s leaving, slam¬ 
ming the door with a noise that would echo around the 
world, or about his abandoning them to the mercy of 
their enemies. Not at all: glory was for others. What they 
could not endure was the uncertainty he had inspired in 
them ever since his decision ro renounce power, which 
became more and more unbearable the more he continued 
to slog his way through this endless journey to nowhere. 

That night the General felt so gratified as he was taking 
his bath that he told Jose Palacios there was not the slight¬ 
est shadow between himself and his officers. Vet the im- 




The General in His Labyrinth 


pressiors he left with the officers was that they had inspired 
neither gratitude nor guilt in the General but rather a germ 
of mistrust. 

Above all Jose Maria Carreho, who since the night of 
their conversation on the barge had continued to show 
his rancor and without realizing it had fed the rumor that 
he was in touch with the Venezuelan separatists. Or, as 
they said at the time, that he was a turncoat. Four years 
earlier the General had expelled him from his heart, as he 
had expelled O’Leary, Montilia, Briceno Mendez, San¬ 
tana, and so many orhers, on the mere suspicion that he 
desired popularity at the expense of the army. As he had 
done four years before, the General had him followed 
now, smelled our his tracks, listened to all the gossip 
brewing against him, in an effort to glimpse some light 
in the darkness of his own doubts. 

One night when he did not know if Carreho was asleep 
or awake, he heard him say in the adjoining room that 
for the sake of the nation’s health even treason was legiti¬ 
mate. Then the General took him by the arm, walked 
him to the patio, and subjected him to the irresistible 
magic of his charm with a calculated intimacy that he 
called on only in times of emergency. Carreho confessed 
the truth. In fact, it made him bitter that the General 
would leave his work adrift, with no concern for how 
orphaned they all felt. But his plans to defect were loyal. 
Weary of searching for a ray of hope on this blind men’s 
journey, incapable of living bereft of a sou!, he had de¬ 
cided to flee to Venezuela and lead an armed movement 
in favor of integration. 

“I can think of nothing more meritorious, - ’ he con¬ 
cluded. 



“And do you really think you’ll be better treated in 
Venezuela?’’ the General asked him. 

Carreho did not dare to say yes. 

“Well, but at least there I’m in my own country',’ he 
said. 

“Don’t be an ass, - ' said the General. “For us America 
is our own country, and it’s all the same: hopeless." 

He did not allow him to say anything more. He spoke 
to him at length, revealing in every word what seemed 
to be his heart, although neither Carreno nor anyone else 
would ever know if it really was. At last he patted him 
on the shoulder and left him in che darkness. 

“Stop hallucinating, Carreno," he said. "It’s all gone 
to hell.” 



on Wednesday, June 16, he received the news that 
the government had confirmed the pension for life granted 
him by the i Congress. He wrote his acknowledgment to 
President Mosquera in a formal letter that was nor free of 
irony, and when he finished dictating he said to Fernando, 
imitating Jose Palacios' majestic plural and ceremonial 
emphasis: “We are rich." On Tuesday, June u, he re¬ 
ceived the passport to leave the country, and he waved 
it in the air, saying: “We are free. Two days later, 
when he awoke from an hour of restless sleep, he opened 
his eyes in the hammock and said: “We are sad.” Then 
he decided to leave for Cartagena without delay, taking 
advantage of the cool, cloudy day. His only specific 
order was that the officers in his entourage should travel 
in civilian clothes and carry no weapons. He gave no ex¬ 
planation, no sign that would permit conjecture regarding 
!its motives, and he allowed no time for saying goodbye 
to anyone. They started out as soon as his personal guards 
were ready, leaving behind the baggage that would follow 
with the rest of the traveling party. 



The General in His Labyrinth 


On his journeys the General was in the habit of making 
casual stops to inquire about the problems of the people 
he met along the way. He asked about everything: the 
age of their children, the nature of their illnesses, the 
condition of their business, what they thought about 
everything. On this occasion he did not say a word, he 
did not change his pace, he did not cough, he did not 
give signs of fatigue, and he had nothing but a glass of 
port all day. At about four o’clock in the afternoon the 
old convent on La Popa Hill was outlined on the horizon. 
It was the season for public prayers, and from the King's 
Highway they saw the lines of pilgrims like arriera ants 
ascending along the rugged precipice. A short while later 
they spied in the distance the eternal stain of turkey buz¬ 
zards circling the public market and the waters of the 
slaughterhouse. In sight of the walls the General mo¬ 
tioned to Jose Maria 1 Harrcno, who approached and of¬ 
fered his robust falconer's stump for him to lean on. “1 
have a confidential mission for you,” the General told 
him in a very low voice. “As soon as we arrive, find out 
v here Sucre’s gotten to," He gave him his customary 
farewell pat on the shoulder and concluded: 

"Just between us, of course.” 

A large party led by Montilla was waiting for them on 
the King’s Highway, and the General found himself 
obliged to finish the journey in the Spanish governor's old 
carriage pu I led by a team of lighthearted mules. Although 
the sun was low, the great mangrove branches seemed to 
boil in the heat of the dead swamps surrounding the city, 
whose pestilential stink was less bearable than that of the 
bay, corrupted for over a century by the blood and offal 
from the slaughterhouse. When they passed through the 



169 


Media Luna Gate a gale of startled turkey buzzards rose 
from the open-air market. There were still traces of the 
panic caused that morning by a rabid dog that had bitten 
several people of various ages, among them a white woman 
from Castile, who had been snooping where she had no 
business being, and some children from the slave quarter, 
who had managed to stone the dog to death themselves. 

ITae body was hanging from a tree at the school door. 
General Montilla had it burned, not only for reasons of 
hygiene but also to prevent people from trying to exorcise 
the dog’s evil spell with African magic. 

The population of the walled district, called by an 
urgent summons, had taken to the streets. The afternoons 
were turning translucent and slow in the |une solstice, 
and on the balconies there were garlands of flowers and 
women dressed in rhe exaggerated popular style of Ma¬ 
drid, and the bells in the cathedral, the music of the regi¬ 
mental bands, and the artillery salutes thundered all the 
way to the sea, bur nothing could mitigate rhe misery they 
wanted to hide. As he waved his hat in greeting from the 
rickety carriage, the General could not help seeing him¬ 
self in a pitiful light when he compared this impoverished 
reception to his triumphal entry into Caracas in August 
of tfiij, when he was crowned with laurels in a carriage 
drawn by the six most beautiful maidens in the city and 
surrounded by a weeping multitude that eternalized him 
that day with rhe name of his glory: The Liberator. 
Caracas was still a remote town in the colonial provinces, 
and ii was ugly, sad, and commonplace, but the after¬ 
noons in Avila tore at his nostalgia. 

The two memories did nor seem to belong to the same 
life, for the very noble and heroic city of Cartagena de 


The General in His Labyrinth 


Indus, which had been capital of the viceregency sev¬ 
eral times and had been celebrated a thousand times as 
one of the most beautiful cities in the world, was not 
even a shadow of what it once had been. It had suffered 
nine miiitarv sieges bv land and bv sea and had been 

w m # 

sacked on various occasions by pirates and generr Is. Nev¬ 
ertheless, nothing had devastated it as much as the battles 
for independence followed by the factional wars. The 
wealthy families from its golden age had fled. The former 
slaves had been set adrift in a useless freedom, and from 
the marquises' palaces taken over by the poverty-stricken, 
rats as big as cats poured onto the rubbish heaps of the 
streets. The cordon of invincible bastions that the King of 
Spain had wanted to view with his telescopes from the 
watchtowers of his palace could not even be imagined 
among rhe brambles. The commerce that had been the 
most flourishing in the seventeenth century because of 
the slave traffic was reduced to a handful of ruined shops. 
It was impossible to reconcile glory with the stench 
from the open sewers. The General sighed into Monti- 
11a’s ear: 

“H hat a price we’ve had ro pav for an independence 
that’s not worth shit!” 

That night Montilla gathered the cream of the city in 
his seignorial house on Calle La actori.s. where the Mar¬ 
quis de Valdehoyos had lived a villainous life and his 
Marquise had prospered from smuggling flour and traf¬ 
ficking in blacks. Easter lighrs had been lit in the princi¬ 
pal houses, but the General had no illusions because he 
knew that in the Caribbean anything, even an illustrious 
death, could be the excuse for public revels. And in fact 
it was a false fiesta. Vile broadsides had been in circula- 







lion for several days* and the opposition parry had incited 
its gangs to throw stones through windows and battle 
the police with cudgels, “It's just as well there are no 
more windows left to break/' said Monrilh with his cus¬ 
tomary humor, well aware that popular anger was di¬ 
rected at him more than at the General He reinforced 
the grenadiers of the guard with local troops, cordoned 
off the area, and ordered that his guest not be told of the 
war in the streets. 

That night the Count de Raigecourt came to tell the 
General that the F.nglish packet boat was in sight of the 
castles on Boca Chica but that he was not leaving. The 
public reason was his not wanting to share the immensity 
of the ocean with a group of women, who were all 

crowded into the onlv cabin. But the truth w as that de* 

* 

spite the urbane lunch at Turbaco, despite the adventure 
at the cockpit, despite all the General had done to over¬ 
come the misfortunes of his health, the Count realized 
he was in no condition to undertake the voyage. He 
thought perhaps the General s spirit could endure the 
crossing, but nor his body, and he refused to do death a 
favor. Nevertheless, these reasons and many others like 
them failed to shake the General's determination that 
night. 

Montilh did not admit defeat. He said eariv goodbyes 

■m ■**- * 

to his guests so that the sick man might rest, but he kept 
him a good w hile longer on the interior balcony w hile 
a languid adolescent girl in an almost invisible muslin 
tunic plaved seven romanzas for them on the harp. They 
were so beautiful, and were performed with so much 
tenderness, that the two soldiers did not have the heart 
to speak until the sea breeze had cleared the last ashes of 


The General in His Labyrinth 


music from the air. The General sat dozing in the rock¬ 
ing chair, floating on the waves of the harp, when with¬ 
out warning he shuddered inside and sang all the words 
of the last song in a very low but dear and harmonious 
voice. When the song was over he turned to the harpist, 
murmuring thanks that came from his soul, but the only 
thing he saw was the harp, hung with a garland of with¬ 
ered laurels. ! hen he remembered, 

! here’s a man in prison in Honda for justifiable homi¬ 
cide,” he said. 

Montilla’s laughter preceded his own witticism: 

“What color are his horns?” 

1 he General let the remark pass and explained the 
case in all its details except for his earlier acquaintance 
with Miranda Lyndsay in Jamaica. Montilla had a simple 
solution. 

“He should ask to be transferred here for reasons 
of health.■' he said. “Once he’s here we’U arrange his 
pardon." 

“Can you do that?” asked the General. 

"No,” said Montilla, “but we do it." 

1 he General dosed his eyes, oblivious to the sudden 
loud barking of the dogs in the night, and Montilla 
thought he had gone back to sleep. After deep reflection 
he opened his eyes again and filed the matter away. 

“All right,” he said, “But 1 don't know' anything.” 

Only then did he notice the barking that spread in con¬ 
centric waves from the walled district to the remotest 
swamps, where there were dogs trained in the art of not 
barking so they would not betray their owners. General 
Montilla told him they w ere poisoning the street dogs to 
prevent the spread of rabies. In the slave quarter they had 







1 7 3 


succeeded in capturing only two of the children who 
had been bitten. The others, as always, had been hidden 
by their parents so they could die under their own gods, 
or had been taken beyond the reach of the government 
to the strongholds of the fugitive slaves in the swamps 
of Marialabaja, in an effort to save them with the witch 
doctors 1 arts. 

The General had never attempted to suppress those 
calamitous rites, but he thought that poisoning dogs was 
unworthy of the human condition. He loved them as 
much as horses and flowers. When he sailed for Europe 
the first time, he carried a pair of pups with him all the 
way to Veracruz, He had more than ten dogs with him 
when he left Llanos in Venezuela and crossed the 
Andes at the head of four hundred barefoot plainsmen 
to liberate New Granada and found the Republic of 
Colombia. He always took them into battle. Nevada, the 
most famous, who had been with him from his earliest 
campaigns and had defeated without help a brigade of 
twenty bloodthirsty dogs belonging to the Spanish armies, 
had been killed by a lance during the first battle of Cara- 
bobo. In 1 dma, Manuela Saenz owned more chan she could 
care for, in addition to the numerous animals of all kinds 
that she kept on the estate at La Magdalena. Someone had 
told the General that when a dog died it had to be re¬ 
placed without delay by another just like it, and with 
the same name, so you could go on believing it was the 
same animal. He did not agree. He always wanted them 
to be distinctive so he could remember them all with 
their own identities, their yearning eyes and eager spirits, 
and could mourn their deaths, Among the victims of the 
attack on the evil night of September 25 were the two 




The General in His Labyrinth 


bloodhounds whose heads had been cut off by the con¬ 
spirators. Now, on his final journey, he had wirh him the 
two that survived, as well as the ferocious, ill-favored 
stray they had picked up on the river. Montilla’s an¬ 
nouncement that on the first day alone they had poisoned 
over fifty dogs ruined the state of mind created in him 
by the harp of love. 

Montilla was truly sorry and promised there would be 
no more dogs killed in the streets. The promise calmed 
him, not because he believed it would be kept, but be¬ 
cause the good intentions of his generals were a eonsola- 
rion to him. The splendor of the night was responsible 
for the rest. The scent of jasmine rose from the illumi¬ 
nated patio, the air seemed like diamonds, and there were 
more stars than ever in the sky. "Like Andalusia in April," 
he had once said, remembering Columbus. A crosswind 
swept away the noises and the smells, and all that re¬ 
mained was the thunder of the waves against the wails. 

‘‘General," pleaded Montilla. “Don't go." 

‘‘The ship is in port," he said. 

“There’ i be others," said Montilla. 

"It doesn’t matter," he replied. “They’re all the last 
one” 

He would not budge. After much pleading, to no avail, 
Montilla had no other recourse than to reveal the secret 
he had sworn to keep until just before it was to take place: 
General Rafael Urdaneta, at the head of the Bolivarist 
officers, was preparing a coup in Santa Fe de Bogota for 
early in September. Contrary to .Montilla’s expectations, 
the General did not seem surprised. 

“I didn't know," he said, “but it was easy to imagine.” j 

Then Montilla disclosed the details of the military con- 




i?5 


spiracy brewing in all the loyal garrisons in the country! 
with the compliance of officers in Venezuela* The Gen¬ 
eral gave it deep thought* 'it makes no sense/’ he said* 
“If Urdanera really wants to save the world, let him 
make peace with Paez and repeat the history of the last 
fifteen years all rhe way from Caracas to Lima. 1 hen it 
will just be a patriotic excursion down to Patagonia/' 
Nevertheless, before he retired he left a small opening. 

‘‘Does Sucre know?" he asked* 

“He s against it/’ said Monolla. 

“Because of his quarrel with Urdaneta* of course/' 
said the General. 

“No/ 1 said Montilla. "Because he's against everything 
that keeps him from Quito." 

'in any event, he’s the one you have to talk to/' said 
the General* “You're w p asting your time with me." 

It seemed his final word. Very early the next day he 
even gave lose Palacios orders to load rhe baggage while 
the packet was in the bay, and he sent him to ask the 
ship's captain to anchor her opposite the fortress of Santo 
Domingo during the afternoon so that he could watch 
from the balcony of his house* The arrangements were 
so precise that his officers thought he would not take any 
of them because he had not said who was traveling with 
him* Wilson proceeded in accordance with the plan made 
in January and loaded his luggage without consulting 
anyone. 

Even those least convinced of his departure went to 
say goodbye when they saw the six loaded wagons roll¬ 
ing through the streets toward the wharf on rhe bay. 1'he 
Count de Raigecourt, accompanied on this occasion by 
Camille, was the guest of honor at luncheon. Her hair was 


The General in His Labyrinth 


pulled back into a chignon, she wore a green tunic and 
slippers, and she looked younger, her eyes less cruel. The 
General concealed with a compliment his displeasure at 
seeing her. 

“The lady must be very certain of her beauty for green 
to look so well on her,” he said in Spanish. 

The Count translated on the spot, and Camille burst 
into the laughter of a free woman, saturating the entire 
house with her licorice breath. “Let s not start again, 
Don Simon," she said. Something had changed in them 
both, for neither dared to take up the rhetorical jousting 
of their first meeting for fear of wounding the other. 
Camille forgot him as she flitted at her pleasure through 
3 crowd educated to speak French on just such occasions 
as this. The General went to converse with Friar Sebas¬ 
tian de Siguenza, .1 saintly man who enjoyed well-deserved 
prestige for having cured Humboldt of the smallpox he 
contracted on his visit to the city in the year 1800. The 
friar was the only person who attributed no importance 
to what he had done. "The Lord has willed that some die 
of smallpox and others not, and the Baron was one of the 
latter," he would say. The General had asked to meet 
him on his previous trip, when he learned that he cured 
three hundred different diseases using medicines with an 
aloe base. 

Montilla had already given orders to prepare the fare¬ 
well military parade, when Jose Palacios returned from 
the port with the official message that the packet would 
be in front of the house after lunch. As protection against 
the afternoon sun in mid-June, Montilla ordered awnings 
placed on the tenders that would carry the General from 


>77 


the fortress of Santo Domingo to the ship. At eleven 
o’clock, when the house was crowded with invited guests 
and casual visitors suffocating in the heat, all manner of 
curiosities of the local cuisine were served on the long 
table. Camille could not explain the reason for the com¬ 
motion that shook the room until she heard the faint voice 
very close to her ear: '‘Apres vous s vradame." The Gen¬ 
eral helped her to a little of everything, explaining the 
name, recipe, and origin of each dish, and then to the 
astonishment of his cook he served himself an even larger 
portion, for an hour before he had refused delicacies more 
exquisite than rhose displayed on the table. Then, making 
his way through the groups searching for a place to sir, 
he led her to the oasis of large tropical flowers on the 
interior balcony, and he made his proposition without 
preambles, 

"It would be very pleasant to see each other in Kings¬ 
ton/’ he said. 

"Nothing would please me more," she said, without a 
trace of surprise. "I adore the Blue Mountains.' 

“Alone?” 

"No matter whom I'm with I’ll always be alone," she 
said. And she added with a roguish touch: ‘‘Excellency.’’ 

He smiled. 

“I'll find you through Hyslop," he said. 

That was all. He led her back through the room to the 
spot where he had found her. took his leave with a bow 
worthy of a contredanse, left his plate untouched on a 
windowsill, and returned to his place. Nobody knew 
when he made the decision to stay, or why he made it. 
He was besieged by politicians discussing local dissensions, 


The General in His Labyrinth 


when he turned suddenly to de Raigecourt and made a 
remark that had no bearing on the subject and was in¬ 
tended for everyone's ears; 

“You’re right. Count. What will l do with so many 
women, in the lamentable state in which i find myself''’ 

“Just so. General," said the Count with a sigh. And he 
hastened to add; “On the other hand, the Shannon ar¬ 
rives next week, an English frigate with a good stateroom 
and an excellent physician as w-ell." 

“That’s worse than a hundred women,” said the 
General 

In any case, the explanation was only a pretext, because 
one of the officers was prepared to give him his cabin 
until they reached Jamaica. Jose Palacios was the only 
man who offered a precise reason, with his infallible: 
“Only my master knows what my master is thinking.” 
And he could not have sailed in any event, because the 
packet ran aground on its way to pick him up across from 
Santo Domingo and suffered serious damage. 

And so he stayed, and the only condition was that 
he would not remain in Montilla’s house. The General 
thought it the most beautiful in the city, but because of 
its proximity to the sea it was too humid for his bones, 
above all in winter, when he awoke with the sheets 
soaked through. His health demanded winds less heraldic 
than those of the walled district. Montilla interpreted 
this as a sign that he would be staying for some time, and 
he hastened to accommodate him. 

On the spur of La Popa Hill was a holiday suburb 
burned in 1815 by the Cartagenans so that the royalist 
troops who had come back to reconquer the city would 
have no place to make camp. T he sacrifice was futile. 




1 79 


because the Spanish captured the for rifled area after one 
hundred sixteen days, during which time those under 
siege are even the soles of their shoes, and six thousand 
died of hunger* Fifteen years later the calcined plain was 
still exposed to the furious two o'clock sun* One of the 
few rebuilt houses belonged to the English merchant 
fudah Kingsdler, who was away on a journey* It had 
attracted the General's attention when he arrived from 
l urbaco, for its palm roof was well cared for and its 
walls were painted in festive colors, and it was almost 
hidden in a grove of fruit trees. General Montilla thought 
it was too modest a house for so splendid a tenant, but the 
General reminded him that he was as accustomed to 
sleeping on the floor of a pigsty, wrapped in his cape, 
as in a duchess' bed* And so he rented the house for an 
indefinite period, with an extra charge for the bed, the 
water jug, the six leather taborets in the drawing room, 
and the handmade still in which Senor Kingsdler brewed 
his own liquor* General Montilla also brought a velvet 
armchair from Government House and had a eane-and- 
mud barracks built for the grenadiers of the guard. The 
house was cool during the hours when the sun shone 
hottest, less humid at any hour than the Marquis de Val- 
de hoy os’ mansion, and it had four airy bedrooms where 
iguanas strolled. His insomnia was less arid at dawn as 
he listened to the sudden explosions of \ *pe soursop fruit 
falling from the trees* In the afternoons, above all when 
the rains were heavy, the processions of the poor could 
be seen bearing their drowned to the convent for a vigil. 

After he moved to the foot of La Popa, the General 
returned to the walled district no more than three times, 
and then only to pose for Antonio Mcucci, an Italian 




The General in His Labyrinth 


painter who was visiting Cartagena. He felt so weak that 
he had to sir down on the interior terrace of the Marquis's 
mansion, surrounded bv wildflowers and boisterous birds, 
and in any event lie could not sit still for longer than an 
hour. He liked the portrait, although it was evident that 
the artist had viewed him wirh too much compassion. 

The New Granadan artist Jose Maria Espinosa had 
painted his portrait in Government House in Santa Fe de 
Bogota not long before the September assassination at¬ 
tempt, and it seemed so unlike the image he had of himself 
that he could not resist the impulse to discuss it with 
General Santana, his secretary at the time. 

“Do you know who this portrait looks like?” he said. 
“Oiaya, that old man from La Mesa." 

When Manucla Saenz found out, she did not hide her 
indignation, for she knew the old man too. 

“It seems to me you don’t have a very good opinion of 
yourself," she said. “Oiaya was almost eighty years old 
the last time we saw him, and he couldn’t even stand up.” 

i he oldest of his portraits was an anonymous miniature 
painted in Madrid when he was sixteen. When he was 
thirty-two another was painted in Haiti, and both were 
faithful to his age and Caribbean character. He had a 
strain of African blood through a paternal great-great- 
grandfather, who had farhered a son by a slave woman, 
and it was so evident in his features that the aristocrats in 
Lima called him Sambo. But as his glory increased, the 
painters began to idealize him, washing his blood, my¬ 
thologizing him, until they established him in official 
memory with the Roman profile of his statues. But Es¬ 
pinosa's portrait resembled no one but him, wasted at the 


181 


age of forty-five by the disease he did everything to hide, 
even from himself, until the eve of his death. 

One rainy night when he awoke from a restless sleep 
in the house at the foot of La Popa, the General saw a 
young girl sitting in a corner of the bedroom and wear¬ 
ing the rough burlap tunic of a lay evangelical eongre~ 
gation, her hair adorned with a crown of shining fire 
beetles. During the colonial period European travelers 
were amazed to see Indians lighting their way with a flask 
full of the fire beetles that later became a republican fash¬ 
ion, when women used them as shining garlands on their 
hair, as diadems of light on their foreheads, as phosphores¬ 
cent brooches on their bosoms. I he girl who came into the 
bedroom that night had them sewn in a band that illumi¬ 
nated her face with phantasmal light. She was languid 
and mysterious, her hair was graying at the age of twenty, 
and he soon detected the marks of the virtue he valued 
most in a woman; untamed intelligence. She had come to 
the grenadiers’ camp to offer herself for any purpose, and 
she seemed so extraordinary to the officer on duty that 
he sent her with Jose Palacios in case he might be inter¬ 
ested in her for the General, who invited her to lie down 
beside him, for he did not have the strength to carry her 
to the hammock. She removed the headband, placed the 
fire beetles inside a stalk of sugarcane she carried with 
her, and lay down at his side. After a desultory conver¬ 
sation the General dared to ask her what they thought 
of him in Cartagena, 

“They say Your Excellency is well but pretends to be 
sick so people will feel sorry for you, 1 ' she said. 

He took off his nightshirt and asked the girl to ex- 




The General in His Labyrinth 


amine him by the light of the candle. Then she gained 
thorough knowledge of the most ravaged body one could 
imagine: the meager belly, the ribs pushing through the 
skin, the legs and arms reduced to mere bone, all of it 
enclosed in a hairless hide as pale as death except for the 
face, which was so weathered bv exposure to the elements 
that it seemed to belong to another man. 

“The only thing lacking is for me to die,” he said. 

The girl persisted. 

“People say you've always been like this but now it 
suits you to let them know about it." 

He did not concede to her testimony. He continued to 
offer conclusive proofs of his illness, while she drifted in 
and out of an easy slumber and answered him as she 
slept without losing rhe thread of the dialogue. He did 
not even touch her all night: it was enough for him to 
feel the warm sun of her adolescence. Then, just outside 
the window. Captain ' rurbidc began to sing: “// the tern- 
pest continues and the hurricane blows, put your arms 
round my neck . let the sea swallow us.” It was a song 
from another time, when his stomach could still endure 
the awful evocative power of ripe guavas and the rigors 
of a woman in the dark. The General and the girl lis¬ 
tened to it together, almost with devotion, but she fell 
asleep in the middle of the next song, and a short while 
later he fell into an unquiet stupor. The silence was 
so pure afrer rhe music that the dogs began to bark 
when she stood and tiptoed away in order not to awaken 
the General. He heard her feeling for the latch in the 
dark. 

“You're leaving a virgin,” he said. 

She answered with a festive laugh: 



i8 3 

“No one is a virgin after a night with Your Excel¬ 
lency.” 

She left, as they all did. i or of all the women who 
passed through his life, many of them for a few brief 
hours, there was none to whom he had even suggested 
the idea of staying. In his urgencies of love he was capable 
of changing the world in order to go to them. Once satis¬ 
fied. he was content with the illusion that he would keep 
them in his memory, give himself to them from a distance 
in passionate letters, send them extravagant gifts to pro¬ 
tect himself from oblivion, but, with an emotion that 
resembled vanity more than love, he would not commit 
the least part of his life to them. 

As soon as he was atone that night he got up to join 
Iturbide, who was still talking with other officers around 
the tire in the patio. He had him sing until! dawn, accom¬ 
panied on the guitar by Colonel Jose de la Cruz Paredes, 
and because of the songs he requested, all of them realized 
he was in a bad humor. 

He had returned from his second trip to Europe with 
an enthusiasm for the fashionable tunes of the day, which 
he sang at the top of his voice and danced with insuper¬ 
able grace at the weddings of well-born mestizos in Ca¬ 
racas. The war changed his taste. The romantic popular 
songs that had led him by the hand through the countless 
doubts of his first love affairs were replaced by sumptuous 
waltzes and triumphal marches. That night in Cartagena 
he again requested the songs of his youth, some so old he 
had to teach them to Iturbide, who was too young to 
remember them. The audience slipped away as the Gen¬ 
eral bled inside, and he was left alone with Iturbide be¬ 
side the embers. 



The General in His Labyrinth 


It was a strange night, without a star in the sky, and a 
sea wind was blowing, heavy with the weeping of or¬ 
phans and the fragrance of decay. Iturbide was a man of 
great silences, as inspired in his unblinking contemplation 
of frozen ashes as in his ability to sing al i [light without 
stopping. The General, as he poked the fire with a stick, 
broke the spell: 

“What are they saying in Mexico?” 

“I don’t have anyone there,” said (iturbide. “I’m an 
exile.” 

“All of us here are exiles,” said the General. ‘‘I've lived 
in Venezuela only six years since this began, and the rest 
of the time has been spent heading off calamities in half 
the world. You can’t imagine what I’d give right now to 
be eating an hervido in San Mateo.” 

His mind must have truly flown away to the sugar 
mills of his childhood, for his silence was deep as he 
watched the dying fire. When he spoke again he was 
back on solid ground. “The damn problem is that we 
stopped being Spaniards and then we w r ent here and there 
and everywhere in countries that change their names 
and governments so much from one day to the next we 
don't know where the hell w r e come from,” he said. He 
contemplated the ashes again for a long time and asked 
in a different tone of voice: 

“And since there are so many countries in this world, 
how did it occur to you to come here?" 

Iturbide’s answer had a long preamble. “At military 
school they taught us to make war on paper,” he said. 
“We fought with little lead soldiers on plaster maps. On 
Sundays they would take us to the nearby meadows, 
along with the cows and the ladies coming back from 




i8 5 


Mass, and the Colonel would shoot the cannon so we 
could grow accustomed to the shock of the explosion 
and the smell of gunpowder. Imagine, the most famous 
teacher was a disabled Englishman who taught us how 
to fall off our horses when we were killed/" 

The General interrupted him, 

“And you wanted real war/' 

“Your war, General/' said Iturbidc, "But it’ll be two 
years since the army accepted me, and I still don't know 
what a fiesh-and-blood battle is like/' 

The General still had nor looked him in the face. “Well, 
you chose the wrong destiny/' he said, "The only wars 
here will be civil wars, and those arc like killing your 
own mother/* From the shadows Jose Palacios reminded 
him that it was almost dawn. Then he scattered the ashes 
with the stick, and as he stood up, clutching Iturbidc s 
arm, he said: 

"If I were you I’d get out of here as fast as I could 
before dishonor caught up with me/' 

Until the day he died Jose Palacios insisted that the 
house at the foot of La Popa was possessed by evil spirits. 
They were still settling in when the ship’s officer, Jose 
Tomas Machado, arrived from V enezuela with the news 
that several military cantonments had disavowed the sepa¬ 
ratist government and that a new party in favor of the 
General was gaining strength. He received Machado alone 
and listened to him with attention, but he was not very 
enthusiastic, “The news is good, but it comes too late/* 
he said, “And as for me, what can a poor invalid do against 
the whole world?” He gave instructions to lodge the emis¬ 
sary with all honors, but he did not promise him a reply. 
“I do not expect health for our native land/' he said. 



The General in His Labyrinth 


Nevertheless, as soon as he said goodbye to Captain 
Machado, the General turned to Carreho and asked him: 
“Did vou locate Sucre?" Yes, he had left Santa Fe de 
Bogota in the middle of May, in a rush to spend his saint s 
day with his wife and daughter. 

“He left in plenty of time," concluded <jarreiio, “be¬ 
cause President Mosquera passed him on the Popayan 
road.” 

“1 can't believe it!" said the General, surprised. “He 
traveled by land?" 

“That’s right. General.” 

“Merciful God!" he said. 

It was a presentiment. That same night he received the 
news that on June 4 Field Marshal Sucre had been am¬ 
bushed and assassinated by a bullet in the back as he was 
traveling the dark stretch of road at Berruecos. Montilla 
arrived with the bad news when the General had finished 
his evening bath, and he did not listen to the entire report. 
He slapped his forehead and tore at the tablecloth where 
the supper dishes still lay, maddened by one of his bib¬ 
lical rages. 

“Fuck it!” he shouted. 

The echoes of his outburst were still resonating through 
the house when he regained control of himself. He fell 
into the chair, bellowing, “It was Obando." And he re¬ 
peated it many times: “It was Obando, the Spaniards’ paid 
assassin." He referred to General Jose Maria Obando, the 
commander of Pasro, on the southern frontier of New 
Granada, who had thus deprived the General of his only 
possible successor and assured for himself the presidency 
of the Republic that had been cut to pieces in order to 




•«7 


hand it over to Santander, In his memoirs one of the 
conspirators recounted that as he was leaving the house 
on the main square of Santa t e de Bogota where the 
crime had been planned, he had suffered a disturbance in 
his soul when he saw i ield Marshal Sucre in the icy fog 
of nightfall, wearing his black wool greatcoat and his 
poor man's hat as he walked alone, his hands in his pock¬ 
ets, through the atrium of the cathedral. 

1 in the night he learned of Sucre's death the General 
vomited blood, Jose Palacios hid the fact, as he had in 
r londa when he surprised the General on all fours wash¬ 
ing the bathroom floor with a sponge. He kept the two 
secrets without being asked to, thinking it was not ap¬ 
propriate to add more bad news when there was already 
so much of it* 

On a night like this, in Guayaquil, the General had 
become aware of his premature aging. He still wore his 
hair down to his shoulders and for convenience tied it 
at the back of his neck with a ribbon for his battles in war 
and in love, but on that occasion he realized his hair was 
almost white and his face was withered and sad* ‘if you 
saw me you wouldn't recognize me, 1 ' he had written to a 
friend. *Tm forty-one years old, but I look like an old 
man of sixty* 1 f That night he cut his hair. A short while 
later, in Potosf, trying to hold back the gale winds of 
fugitive youth escaping between his fingers, he shaved off 
his mustache and sideburns* 

After the assassination of Sucre he had no further 
dressing table artifices to hide his age. The house at the 
foot of La Popa sank into mourning. The officers stopped 
playing cards and spent the nights talking until ail hours 



The General in His Labyrinth 


in the patio, around the perpetual fire intended to drive 
away the mosquitoes, or lying in hammocks hung at dif¬ 
ferent levels in the common bedroom. 

The General gave himself over to distilling his bitter¬ 
ness drop by drop. He chose two or three of his officers 
at random, and he kept them awake, showing them the 
worst of what he kept hidden in his festering heart. He 
made them listen once again to the old talc about the time 
his armies were at the ve ge of dissolution because of the 
niggardliness with which Santander, as appointed Presi¬ 
dent of Colombia, resisted sending him rroops and money 
to complete the liberation of Peru. 

“He's a miser and a skinflint by nature," he said, “but 
his reasoning was even more perverse: he didn't have the 
brains to see beyond the colonial borders." 

He repeated for the thousandth time the old story that 
the fatal blow to integration was inviting the United 
States to the Congress of Panama, as Santander had done 
on his own account, when it was a question of nothing 
less than proclaiming the unity of America. 

“It was like inviting the cat to the mice's fiesta,” he 
said. “And all because the United States threatened to 
accuse us of turning the continent into a league of popular 
states opposed to the Holy Alliance. What an honor!" 

He repeated one more time his horror at the inconceiv¬ 
able sangfroid with which Santander accomplished his 
purposes. “He's as cold as a dead fish,” he said. He re¬ 
peated for the thousandth time his diatribe against the 
loans Santander received from London, and the compla¬ 
cency with which he sponsored the corruption of his 
friends. Each time he recalled him, in private or in pub- 






189 


lie, he added poison to a political atmosphere that did not 
seem able to conrain another drop. But he could not re¬ 
strain himself. 

“That was how the world began to fall apart," he said. 

He had been so rigorous in his handling of public funds 
that he could not return to this subject without losing his 
temper. As President he had decreed the death penalty 
for any official employee who misappropriated or stole 
more than ten pesos. Yet he was so openhanded with his 
personal wealth that in a few years he spent a large por¬ 
tion of the fortune he inherited from his parents on the 
wars for independence. His earnings were divided among 
the war widows and the men disabled in battle. He gave 
his nieces and nephews the sugar plantations he had in¬ 
herited, he gave his sisters the house in Caracas, and most 
of his lands he divided among the numerous slaves he 
freed before the abolition of slavery. He refused the mil¬ 
lion pesos ofFered him by the Congress of Lima in the 
euphoria of liberation. A few days before his renuncia¬ 
tion he presented to a friend in financial difficulties the 
Monserrate estate awarded him by the government so he 
would have a worthy place to live. In Apure he got up 
from the hammock where he was sleeping and presented 
it to a scout so he could sweat out his fever, while he 
slept on the ground wrapped in a battle cloak. 'I he twenty 
thousand duros in hard cash that he wanted to pay out 
of his own funds to the Quaker educator Joseph Lan¬ 
caster was not his personal debt but the state’s. He left 
the horses he loved so well with friends—even Palomo 
Blanco, the best-known and most glorious, who stayed 
behind in Bolivia to preside over rhe stables of Field Mar- 


The Gejieral in His Labyrinth 


shal de Santa Cruz. And therefore the topic of embezzled 
loans drove him unrestrained to the extremes of perfidy, 

“Cassandro came out clean, of course, just as he did on 
September ij, i ecausc he’s a wizard at observing good 
form,” he would say to anyone who w’ould listen. “But 
his friends took back to England the same money the 
English had tent the nation at savage interest, and they 
increased it and made a profit through usury." 

He revealed to everyone, all night long, the muddiest 
depths of his soul. At dawn of the fourth day, when the 
crisis seemed to have become eternal, be appeared at the 
patio door in the same clothes he was wearing when he 
received news of the crime, called General Briceno Men¬ 
dez aside, and spoke with him alone until the first roosters 
crowed, the General in his hammock with the mosquito 
netting and Briceno Mendez in another that Jose Palacios 
hung beside it. Perhaps neither of them was aware of how r 
much they had abandoned the sedentary habits ot peace 
and returned in a few days to the uncertain nights of 
military camp. That conversation made it clear to the 
Genera] that the disquiet and desires expressed by Jose 
Maria Carreno in Turbaco were not his alone but w'ere 
shared by most of the Venezuelan officers. After the ac¬ 
tions of the New Granadans against them, they felt more 
Venezuelan than ever but were prepared to die for inte¬ 
gration. If the General had ordered them to fight in 
Venezuela, they would have hurried there in droves. And 
Briceno Mendez would have been the first. 

Those were the worst days. The only visitor the Gen¬ 
eral agreed to receive was the Pole, Colonel Miecicslaw 
Napierski, hero of the battle of Friedland and survivor 
of the disaster at Leipzig, w j ho had come with a recom- 





191 


mendation from General Poniatouski ru join the Army 
of Colombia. 

“You've come too late/' the General had told him. 
“There’s nothing left here/ 1 

After the death of Sucre there was less than nothing* 
This is what he said to Napierski, and this is what Napier- 
ski said in his travel journal, which a great New Granadan 
poet would recover for history one hundred eighty years 
later. Napierski had arrived aboard the Shannon, The 
ship s captain accompanied him to the General’s house, 
and the General spoke to them of his desire to travel to 
Europe, but neither one could detect in him a real dis¬ 
position to sail As the frigate would make a stop in La 
Guayra and return to Cartagena before sailing for Kings¬ 
ton, the General gave the captain a letter for his Vene¬ 
zuelan agent in the negotiations concerning the Area 
Mines, hoping he would send him money on the return 
trip. But the frigate came back without a reply, which 
disheartened him so much that nobody thought to ask 
him if he was leaving. 

There was not a single piece of consolatory news, Jose 
Palacios, for his part, was careful not ro make the reports 
they received worse and tried to hold back as much as 

w 

possible- Something that concerned the officers of rhe 
entourage, which they hid from the General in order 
not to complete his mortification, w as that the hussars and 
grenadiers of the guard were sowing the fiery seed of an 
immortal gonorrhea. It had begun with tw'o w’omen who 
passed through the entire garrison during the nights in 
Honda, and the soldiers had continued to disseminate it 
wherever they went with their dissolute lovemaking. At 
that moment none of the troops had escaped, although 




The General in His Labyrinth 


there was no academic medicine or witch doctor’s artifice 
they had not tried. 

The measures that lose Palacios took to protect his mas¬ 
ter from unnecessary bitterness were not infallible. One 
night a note wirhout a salutation was passed from hand to 
hand, and no one knew how it reached the General’s 
hammock. He read it without his spectacles, holding it 
at arm’s length, and then he put it in the candle flame and 
held it there between his fingers until it was consumed. 

It was from I osefa Sagrario. She had arrived on Monday 
with her husband and children on the way to Mompox, 
encouraged by the news that the General had been de¬ 
posed and was leaving the country. He never revealed 
what the message said, but he showed signs of great rest¬ 
lessness all night, and at dawn he sent J osefa Sagrario a 
propos.il of reconciliation. She resisted his pleas and con¬ 
tinued her journey as planned wirhout a moment's vacil¬ 
lation. Her only motive, as she told Jose Palacios, was 
that it seemed senseless to make peace with a man she 
already considered dead. 

That week it was learned that Manuela Saenz’ personal 
war for the return of the General had broken out in Santa 
Fe de Bogota. In an attempt to make her life impossi¬ 
ble, the Ministry of the nterior had asked her to turn 
over the archives she had in her care. She refused and 
set in motion a campaign of provocations that drove the 
government mad. In the company of two of her war¬ 
rior slave women she fomented scandals, distributed pam¬ 
phlets glorifying the General, and erased the charcoal 
slogans scrawled on public walls. It was common knowl¬ 
edge that she entered barracks wearing the uniform of a 


1 93 


colonel and was as apt to take part in the soldiers’ ticstas 
as in the officers’ conspiracies. The most serious rumor 
was that right under Urdancta’s nose, she was promoting 
an armed rebellion to reestablish the absolute power of 
the General. 

It was difficult to believe he had the strength for such 
an enterprise. The fevers at nightfall were becoming 
more and more punctual, and his cough was heartrend¬ 
ing. One dawn Jose Palacios heard him shout: "Cunt of a 
country!" He burst into the bedroom, alarmed by an 
exclamarion that the General reproached his officers for 
using, and found him with his cheek bathed in blood. He 
had cut himself shaving, and he was not as indignant at 
the mishap itself as at his own clumsiness. The apothecary 
who treated him, brought in on an emergency call by 
Colonel Wilson, found him in such despair that he tried 
to calm him with some drops of belladonna. The Gen¬ 
eral stopped him short. 

“Let me be," he said. "Despair is the health of the 
damned." 

His sister Maria Antonia wrote to him from Caracas. 
"Everyone complains about your refusing to come and 
settle this disorder," she said. The village priests had de¬ 
cided in his favor, desertions from the army were uncon¬ 
trollable, and the mountains were full of armed men who 
said they wanted no one but him. "This is a fandango for 
lunatics who can’t get along even after they’ve made their 
revolution," his sister said. For while some people clam¬ 
ored for him, every morning the walls in half the country 
were painted with insulting slogans. His family, said the 
broadsides, should be exterminated to the fil th generation. 



The General in His Labyrinth 


The coup de grace came from rhc Congress of Vene¬ 
zuela, meeting in Valencia, who crowned their delibera¬ 
tions with a resolution for definitive separation and a 
solemn declaration that there would be no agreement 
with New Granada and Ecuador as long as the General 
remained in Colombian territory. As much as the action 
itself, it grieved him that the official communique from 
Santa Fe de Bogota was sent through a September 15 
conspirator and Ids mortal encinv, whom President Mos- 
quera had brought back from exile in order to name him 
Minister of the Interior. “I must say that this is the event 
that has affected me most in my life." said the General, 
He spent the night dictating different versions of his 
reply to a variety of secretaries, but his rage was so great 
that he fell asleep. At dawn, after a disturbed sleep, he 
said to Jose Palacios: 

"The day I die the bells in Caracas will ring in jubila¬ 
tion.” 

That was not all that happened. When he heard the 
news of the General's death the Governor of Maracaibo 
would write: 1 hasten to share the news of this great 
event, which, beyond all doubt, will produce untold 
benefits for the cause of liberty and the well-being of 
the country. The genius of evil, the firebrand of anarchy, 
the oppressor of the nation, has ceased to exist," The an¬ 
nouncement, intended at first to inform the government 
in Caracas, ended as a national proclamation. 

In the midst of the horror of those ill-fated days, Jose 
i ’alacios sang out to the General the date of his birth at 
five o’clock in the morning: “The twenty-fourth of July, 
feast day of Saint Christina, Virgin and Martyr." He 



opened his eyes and once again must have been aware of 
himself as one chosen by adversity. 

It was his custom to celebrate not his birthday but 
his saint s day. There were eleven Simons in the Catho¬ 
lic calendar of saints, and he would have preferred to 
be named for the one who helped Christ carry his 
cross, but destiny gave him another Simon, the apostle 
and preacher in Egypt and Ethiopia, whose day is Oc¬ 
tober z 8 . Once, on that date, in Santa Fe de Bogota, he 
was crowned with a laurel wreath during the fiesta. He 
removed it with good humor and placed it, along with all 
his malice, on the head of General Santander, who ac¬ 
cepted it without changing expression* But he reckoned 
his life not by hts name but by his age. Forty-seven had 
a special significance for him, because on July *4 of the 
previous year, in the midst of bad news from all sides 
and the delirium of his pernicious fevers, he had been 
shaken by a presentiment-he, who never admitted the 
reality of presentiments. The message was dear: If he 
could stay alive until his next birthday, then there would 
be no death that could kill him. The mystery of that 
secret oracle was the force that had sustained him until 
now, against all reason. 

“Forty-seven years old, damn it," he murmured. “And 
I'm still alive!” 

He sat up in the hammock, his strength restored and 
his heart elated by the marvelous certainty that he was 
safe from all harm. He called Briccno Mendez, the ring¬ 
leader of those who wanted to go to Venezuela to fight 
for the integrity of Colombia, and through him he granted 
his officers’ wish because it was his binhday. 


The General in His Labyrinth 


“Starting with the rank of lieutenant," he said, “let 
everyone who wants to fight in Venezuela pack up his 
gear.” 

General Briceho Mendez was the first. Another two 
generals, four colonels, and eight captains from the Car¬ 
tagena garrison joined the expedition. But when Carrefio 
reminded the General of his earlier promise, he told him: 

“You’re reserved for a higher destiny." 

Two hours before their departure he decided that Jose 
Laurencio Silva should go as well, for he had the impres¬ 
sion that the rust of routine was worsening his obsession 
with his eyes. Silva declined the honor. 

“This idleness is also a war, and one of the most diffi¬ 
cult," he said. “And therefore I’ll stay here, if my Gen¬ 
eral does not order otherwise." 

On the other hand, lturbide, 1 ernando, and Andres 
Ibarra were denied permission to join the others. “If you 
leave, it will be to another destination,” the General told 
lturbide. He informed Andres, with strange reasoning, 
that General Diego Ibarra was already in the struggle, 
and two brothers were too many for the same war. Fer¬ 
nando did not even volunteer, because he was sure he 
would receive the same answer he always did: “A man 
must be whole to go to war, but he cannot allow' his tw'O 
eyes and right hand to go without him.” He resigned him¬ 
self with the consolation that this answer was, in a cer¬ 
tain sense, a kind of military distinction. 

Montilla brought the travel funds on the same night 
they were approved, and he took part in the simple cere¬ 
mony in which the General said goodbye to each of 
them with an embrace and a few words. They left one 
by one, taking different routes, some headed for Jamaica, 




>97 


others for Curasao, others for Guajira, and all wearing 
civilian clothes, without weapons or anything else that 
could betray their identity, just as they had learned to do 
in their clandestine actions against the Spanish. At dawn 
the house at the foot of La Popa was a dismantled bar¬ 
racks, but the General was sustained by the hope that a 
new war would make the laurels of long ago green again. 




general rafael l'rdaneta took power on Sep¬ 
tember 5. The Constituent Congress had come to the 
end of its mandate, and there was no other valid authority 
to legitimatize the coup, but the insurgents appealed to 
the City Council of Santa Fe de Bogota, which recognized 
l Jrdaneta as the man entrusted with power until it was 
assumed by the General, This was the culmination of an 
insurrection hy Venezuelan troops and officers garrisoned 
in New Granada, who defeated the government forces 
with the support of the small landowners on the savan¬ 
na and the rural clergy. It was the first coup d’etat in 
the Republic of Colombia, and the first of the forty-nine 
civil wars we would suffer in what remained of the cen¬ 
tury. President Joaquin Mosquera and Vice-President 
Caycedo, isolated in the midst of nothing, renounced 
their offices. Urdaneta picked up the power left lying on 
the ground, and his first governmental act was to send 
a personal delegation to Cartagena to offer the General 
the presidency of the Republic. 

It had been a long while since Jose Palacios could re- 


The General in His Labyrinth 


member his master’s health as stable as it was during this 
time, for the headaches and twilight fevers surrendered 
their weapons as soon as news of the military coup was 
received. But neither had he seen him more restless. This 
worried Mon til la, who sought the cooperation of Friar 
Sebastian de Sigiienza in providing the General with 
covert relief. The friar was a willing and able accom¬ 
plice, allowing himself to be beaten at chess during the 
arid afternoons when they were waiting for Urdaneta's 
messengers. 

The General had learned how to move the pieces on 
his second trip to Europe, and he came close to mastery 
playing with General O'Leary on dull nights during the 
long campaign in Peru. But he did not feel capable of 
going any further. ''Chess isn’t a game, it’s a passion,” he 
would say. "And I prefer bolder ones.” Nevertheless, 
in his programs for public education he had included it 
among the useful and honest games that should be taught 
in school. The truth was he had not continued because 
his nerves were not made for so circumspect a game, and 
he needed the concentration it demanded for more seri¬ 
ous matters. 

Friar Sebastian found him swaying with violent lurches 
in the hammock he had ordered hung in front of the street 
door so he could keep watch over the parched dust of 
the road where Urdaneta's messengers were to appear, 
‘‘Ah, Father,” the General said when he saw him ap¬ 
proach. “You’re a glutton for punishment.’’ He remained 
seated only long enough to move the pieces, for after 
every play he would stand up while the friar was thinking. 

"Don’t distract me, Excellency," the friar would say, 
“I’m going to skin you alive." 







201 


The General laughed: 

"Pride gocth before a fall/ 1 

< ' Leary would stop by the table to study the board 
and make suggestions to the General, who would reject 
them with indignation. But each time he won he would 
go out to the patio where his officers were playing cards 
to announce his victory. In the middle of one game Friar 
Sebastian asked if he planned to write his memoirs, 

"Never," he said. "They're nothing bur dead men 
making trouble/' 

The mail, which was one of his dominant obsessions, 
became his martyrdom, ft was even worse during those 
weeks of confusion when the mail carriers in Santa Fe de 
Bogota would delay their departure in expectation of 
the latest news and the connecting riders would grow 
weary of waiting for them. On the other hand, the clan¬ 
destine mails became faster and more frequent. As a con¬ 
sequence the General had news of the news before it 
arrived, and there was more than enough time for his 
decisions to ripen. 

On September 17, when he learned that the emissaries 
were near, he sent Car re no and O'Leary to meet them 
on the Turbaco road. The first surprise for Colonels 
Vicente Pineres and Julian Santa Maria was the good 
spirits in which they found the hopeless invalid who was 
the subject of so much talk in Santa Fe de Bogota. A 
solemn ceremony was improvised in the house, with ci¬ 
vilian and military dignitaries, secondhand speeches, and 
toasts to the health of the nation. But when it was over 
he cook the emissaries aside and truths were told in pri¬ 
vate. Colonel Santa Marta, who found solace in melo¬ 
drama, struck the culminating note: If the General did 


The General in His Labyrinth 


not accept command, the most awful anarchy would 
break out in the counrry. The General was evasive. 

“Existence comes before modifications.’' he said. “We 
won't know if there's a nation or nor until the political 
horizon clears.” 

Colonel Santa Maria did not understand. 

“1 mean that the most urgent matter is to reunify the 
countrv by force of arms,” said the General. "But the 
road begins in Venezuela, not here,” 

From then on, that would be his fixed idea: to begin 
again from the beginning, knowing that the enemy was 
not external but inside the house. The oligarchies in each 
country, represented in New Granada by the Santan- 
derists and bv Santander himself, had declared war to 
the death against the idea of integrity because it was un¬ 
favorable to the local privileges of the great families. 

“This is the real cause, the only cause, of the war of 
dispersion that is killing us," said the General. "And the 
saddest part is that they think they 're changing the world 
when thev're really perpetuating the most reactionary 
thought in Spain." 

He drew breath and continued: "1 know I’m ridiculed 
because in rhe same letter, on the same day, and to the 
same person I say first one thing and then the opposite, 
because I approved the plan for monarchy, or I didn't 
approve it, or somewhere I agreed with both positions at 
rhe same rime." He was accused of being capricious in 
the way he judged men and manipulated history, he was 
accused of fighting Fernando VII and embracing Morillo, 
of waging war ro the death against Spain and promoting 
her spirit, of depending on Haiti in order to win the war 
and then considering Haiti a foreign country in order to 









203 


exclude her from the Congress of Panama, of having been 
a Mason and reading Voltaire at Mass but of being the 
paladin of the Church, of courting the I ngiish while 
wooing a French princess, of being frivolous, hypocriti¬ 
cal, and even disloyal because he flattered his friends in 
their presence and denigrated them behind their backs, 
’Well, all of that is true, but circumstantial/’ he said, 
"because everything I've done has been for the sole 
purpose of making this continent into a single, indepen¬ 
dent country, and as far as that’s concerned Eve never 
contradicted myself or had a single doubt." And he 
concluded in pure Caribbean; 

"All the rest is bullshit!" 

in a letter he sent two days later to General Briceno 
Mendez he wrote: "I have not wanted to accept the com¬ 
mand conferred on me by events because I do not want 
to appear to be rhe leader of rebels or be named by dint 
of the victors' military might," Nevertheless, in two let¬ 
ters he dictated that same night to Fernando and sent to 
General Rafael Urdaneta, he was careful not to be so 
radical. 

The first was a formal reply, and his solemnity was far 
too evident* beginning with the salutation: “Most Ex¬ 
cellent Sir." He justified the coup because of the anarchy 
and lawlessness that prevailed in the Republic following 
the dissolution of the previous government. "In such cases 
the people are nor deceived/’ he wrote. Rut there was no 
possibility of his accepting the presidency. All he could 
offer was his willingness to return to Santa Fe de Bogota 
to serve the new government as a simple soldier. 

The other was a private letter, and he indicated this at 
the outset- "My dear General/' It was extensive and ex- 





The General in His Labyrinth 


plicit, and ir did not leave the slightest doubt regarding 
the reasons for his hesitancy. Since Don Joaquin Mos- 
quera had not renounced his title, he could claim recogni¬ 
tion as the legal President tomorrow, makii g the General 
a usurper. And so he reiterated what he had said in the 
official letter: As long as there was no clear mandate from 
a legitimate source, there was no possibility of his assum¬ 
ing power. 

The two letters were sent by the same mail, along with 
the original copy of a proclamation in which he asked the 
country to forget its passions and support the new gov¬ 
ernment. But he distanced hintself from any commitment. 
"Although I may seem to offer a good deal. I offer noth¬ 
ing,” he would say later. And he recognized that he had 
written some words with the sole object of flattering 
those who wanted him in office. What was most signifi¬ 
cant in the second letter was his tone of command, sur¬ 
prising in someone who had been stripped of all power. 
He requested the promotion of Colonel Florencio Jimenez 
so he could go west with enough troops and equipment 
to resist the pointless war being waged against the central 
government by Generals Jose Maria Obando and Jose 
I lilario Lopez: “The men who assassinated Sucre,” he in¬ 
sisted. He also recommended other officers for various 
high positions, i akc care of this,” he told Urdaneta, 
“and I'll see to the rest from the Magdalena to Venezuela, 
including Boyaca.” He was prepared to leave for Santa 
Fe de Bogota at the head of two thousand men and in that 
way contribute to the reestablishment of public order and 
the consolidation of the new government. 

He did not receive direct news again from Urdaneta 
for forty-two days. But in any case he continued to write 








2°5 


to him during the long month when he did nothing but 
impart military orders to the four winds. The ships came 
and went, but there was no more talk of the voyage to 
Europe, although he brought it up from time to time as a 
way of exerting political pressure* The house at the foot 
of La Popa was turned into headquarters for the entire 
country, and few military decisions during those months 
were not inspired or made by him from his hammock. 
Step by step, almost without intending to, he also became 
involved in decisions that went beyond military affairs. 
He even concerned himself with trivial matters, such as 
finding a position in the mail offices for his good friend 
Senor Tatis, or returning General lose Ucros to active 
service because he could no longer endure peace at home. 

During this rime he repeated one of his old phrases with 
renewed emphasis; 'Tm old, sick, tired, disillusioned, 
harassed, slandered, and unappreciated/’ Nevertheless, 
no one who saw him would have believed il For while 
he seemed to twist and turn like a scalded cat only to 
strengthen the government, in reality he was planning, 
wirh the authority and power of the commander in chief, 
each piece of the detailed military strategy with which he 
proposed to regain Venezuela and from there begin to 
restore the largest alliance of nations in the world. 

A more propitious moment could not have been imag¬ 
ined. New Granada, with the liberal parry in defeat and 
Santander anchored in Paris, was safe in Urdaneta’s hands. 
Ecuador was assured by Flores, the same ambitious, con¬ 
tentious Venezuelan leader who had separated Quito and 
Guayaquil from Colombia in order to create the new 
republic but whom the General was certain of bringing 
back to the cause after he defeated Sucre's assassins- Bo- 



The General in His labyrinth 


livia was secure with his friend Field Marshal de Santa 
Cruz, who had just offered him the post of Ambassador 
to the Holy See. And therefore his immediate objective 
was to wrest the control of Venezuela from General i'aez 
once and for all. 

I he General's military plan seemed aimed at launch¬ 
ing a major offensive from Cucuta while Pacz was en¬ 
gaged in the defense of Maracaibo. But on September i 
the Province of Riohacha deposed its military command¬ 
er, refused to recognize the authority of Cartagena, and 
declared itself Venezuelan. Maracaibo not only offered 
immediate support bur also sent in its defense the leader 
of the September: j attempt, General Pedro Carujo, who 
had fled punishment to the protection of the Venezuelan 
government. 

Montilla brought the news as soon as he received it, 
but the General had already heard it and was exultant 

dr 

because the Riohacha insurrection justified his mobilizing 
new and better forces on another front to move against 
Maracaibo. 

“And furthermore, - ' he said, “Carujo is in our hands." 

That same night he closeted himself with his officers 
and outlined the strategy with great precision, describing 
the irregularities of the terrain, moving entire armies like 
chessmen, anticipating the enemy’s most unexpected pur¬ 
poses. He did not have an academic education even com¬ 
parable to that of any of his officers, most of whom had 
been educated at the best military schools in Spain, but 
he had the ability to conceptualize an entire situation 
down to the smallest details. His visual memory was so 
remarkable that he could describe an obstacle seen in 
passing many years before, and although he was tar from 





207 


a master of the arts of war, no one surpassed him m 
inspiration. 

At dawn the plan was finished. It was thorough and 
ferocious and so visionary that the attack on Maracaibo 
was planned for the end of November or* if worst came 
to worst, the beginning of December. When the final 
revision was completed at eight o'clock on a rainy Tues¬ 
day morning, Montilla pointed out the noteworthy ab¬ 
sence of a New Granadan general in the plan. 

“There isn't one from New Granada who's worth any¬ 
thing, the General said,“Those who aren't incompetent 
are scoundrels/' 

Montilla hastened to sweeten the conversation: 

4 *And you, General, where will you be going?" 

“Right now I don’t care if it s Cucuta or Riohacha," 
he said. 

He turned to leave, and General Carreno's hard frown 
reminded him of the promise he had not kept several 
times over. The truth w as he wanted to have him at his 
side at any cost but could no longer bear his restlessness. 
He gave him his usual pat on the shoulder and said: 

"Word of honor, Carreho, you’re going too." 

The expeditionary force of two thousand men set sail 
from Cartagena on September 2j, a date that seemed 
chosen for its symbolism. It was under rhe command of 
Generals Mariano Montilla, Jose Felix Blanco, and Jose 
Maria Carreno, each of whom had a separate commission 
to find a country house in Santa Marta where the General 
could follow the war at close range w r hi!e he recovered 
his health. He wrote to a friend: ‘In two days I leave 
for Santa Marta to take some exercise, to escape the ennui 
in which I find my seif, and to improve my disposition/ 1 




The General in His Labyrinth 


No sooner said than done: On October i he set out on the 
journey. On October 2, while he was en route, he was 
more straightforward in a letter to General justo Briceno: 
“I am on my way to Santa Marta with the intention of 
contributing my influence to the expedition against Mara¬ 
caibo.” The same day he wrote again to Urdaneta: “I am 
on my way to Santa Marta with the intention of visiting 
that region, which I have never seen, and to learn if 1 
can disillusion some enemies who have too great an influ¬ 
ence on opinion.” Only then did he disclose rhe real pur¬ 
pose of his journey: “I will observe at first hand the 
operations against Riohacha, and I will approach Mara¬ 
caibo and the troops to discover if I can influence some 
important operation." Viewed in the proper light, he was 
no longer a defeated pensioner fleeing into exile but a 
general on campaign. 

The departure from Cartagena had been preceded by 
the pressing demands of combat. There was no time for 
official farewells, and he informed very few friends in 
advance. On his instructions, Fernando and lose Palacios 
left half the baggage in the care of friends and commer¬ 
cial establishments to avoid carrying unnecessary encum¬ 
brances to an uncertain war. I hey left ten trunks of 
private papers with the local merchant Don Juan Pava- 
jeau, along with instructions to send them to an address 
in Paris that would be given to him later. On the receipt 
it was stipulated that Senor Pavajeau would bum rhe 
papers in the event the owner could not reclaim them 
because of circumstances beyond his control. 

In the banking establishment of Busch and Company. 
Fernando deposited two hundred ounces of gold that he 
discovered at the eleventh hour, with no clue as to their 










209 


origin, among his uncle’s writing implements. He also 
deposited with Juan de Francisco Martin a chest contain¬ 
ing thirty-five gold medals, as well as a velvet pouch with 
two hundred ninety-four large silver medals, sixty-seven 
small ones, and ninety-six medium-size ones, and an iden¬ 
tical pouch with forty commemorative medals of silver 
and gold, some with the General’s profile. He also left 
with him the gold table settings they had brought from 
Mom pox in an old wine crate, some well-worn bed linen, 
two trunks of books, a sword studded with diamonds, 
and a useless rifle. Among many other, smaller items, the 
vestiges of times gone by, there were several pairs of old 
spectacles, which increased in strength from the time the 
General first discovered his incipient farsightedness, when 
he had difficulty shaving at the age o! thirty-nine, until 
the moment his arm was not long enough for him to 
read. 

Jose Palacios, for his pan, left in the care of Don Juan 
de Dios Amador a chest that had traveled everywhere 
with them for several years but whose contents were not 
known. It was typical of the General: at one moment he 
could not resist a voracious desire for the most unex¬ 
pected objects or for men with no outstanding merits, 
and then, after a time, he had to drag them along with him, 
not knowing how to get rid of them. He had carried that 
chest from Lima to Santa Fe de Bogota in i8j6, and he 
still had it with him after the September jj attempt, 
when he returned to the south for his last war. “We can't 
leave it behind when we don’t even know if it’s ours," 
he would say. When he returned to Santa Fe de Bogota 
for the last time, ready to present his definitive renuncia¬ 
tion to the Constituent Congress, the chest was part of the 




The General in His Labyrinth 


little that remained of his former imperial baggage* At 
last they decided to open it in Cartagena during a general 
inventory of his goods, and inside they discovered a jum¬ 
ble of personal items that had long since been given up 
for lost* There were four hundred fifteen ounces of gold 
coined in Colombia, a portrait of General George Wash¬ 
ington and a lock of his hair, a gold snuffbox given to 
him by the King of England* a gold case with diamond 
keys containing a reliquary, and the great star of Bolivia 
encrusted with diamonds, Jose Palacios left all of it, de¬ 
scribed and annotated, in the house of Juan de Francisco 
Martin and requested the usual receipt. Their baggage 
was then reduced to a more rational size, although they 
still had three of the four trunks with his everyday cloth¬ 
ing, another containing ten worn cotton and linen table¬ 
cloths, and a chest with gold and silver place settings of 
unmatched styles, which the General did not want to 
leave behind or sell, in the event chat they needed to set 
the table for meritorious guests sometime m the future. 
Me had often been advised ro auction these articles in 
order to increase his scant resources, but he always re¬ 
fused, with the argument that they belonged to the state. 

With lightened baggage and a reduced entourage, they 
traveled as far as Turbaco on the first day. They con¬ 
tinued the next day in good weather, but before noon 
they had to take refuge under a roadside shelter, where 
they spent the night exposed to rain and the malignant 
winds out of rhe swamps. The General complained of 
pains in the spleen and the liver, and lose Palacios pre¬ 
pared a potion from rhe French manual, but the pains be¬ 
came more severe and his fever increased. At dawn he was 
so prostrate that they carried him, unconscious, to the 



2 I t 


town of Soledad, where an old friend, Don Pedro Juan 
Visbal, took him into his house. I here he remained for 
over a month, suffering all manner of pains made worse 
by the oppressive October rains, 

Soledad was well named; its solitude consisted of four 
burning, desolate streets lined with the houses of the poor, 
located some two leagues from the place once called Bar¬ 
ranca de San Nicolas, which in a few years would become 
the most prosperous and hospitable city in the country 
and would later be named Barranquilla. The General 
could not have found a more peaceful spot or a house more 
favorable to his health: six Andalusian balconies flooded 
it with light, and the patio was well suited to medita¬ 
tion under the centenarian ceiba tree. The bedroom win¬ 
dow- overlooked the deserted little square with its ruined 
church and the houses painted in holiday colors, with 
roofs of bitter palm. 

But domestic peace did not help him either* The first 
night he suffered a slight attack of vertigo, but he refused 
to admit that it was new evidence of his prostration* In 
accordance with the French manual, he described his ill¬ 
ness as an attack of black bile aggravated by a general 
chill, and a recurrence of rheumatism brought on by ex¬ 
posure* i his multiple diagnosis increased his querulous 
diatribes against simultaneous medicines tor different ill¬ 
nesses, for he said that the ones that were good for some 
ailments were bad for the others. But he also recognized 
that no medication helps the man who refuses to take k, 
and he complained every day about not having a good 
doctor, although he refused to be examined by the many 
who were sent to him. 

In a letter he wrote to his father during this time, 


The Geiieral in His Labyrinth 


Colonel Wilson said that the General could die at any 
moment but that his rejection of doctors was the result of 
lucidity, not contempt. In reality, said Wilson, disease 
was the only enemy the General feared, and he refused to 
confront it so that he would not be distracted from the 
greatest enterprise of his life. “Attending to an illness is 
like working on a ship, J the General had told him. Hour 
years earlier, in Lima, O’Leary had suggested that he 
accept thorough medical treatment while he was pre¬ 
paring the Constitution of Bolivia, and his reply was 
decisive: 

"You can’t win two races at the same time.” 

He seemed convinced that continual movement and 
self-reliance were a charm against disease, Fernanda Bar- 
riga had been in the habit of tying a bib around his neck 
and feeding him with a spoon, as if he were a child, and 
he would accept the food and chew it in silence and even 
open his mouth again when he had finished. But now' he 
took the plate and spoon from her and are with his own 
hand, without a bib, so that everyone would know he 
did not need anyone* It broke Jose Palacios 5 heart when 
he found the General attempting to do for himself the 
domestic chores that his servants or orderlies or aides- 
de-camp had always done for him, and Jose Palacios was 
not consoled to see him spill a flask of ink over him¬ 
self while trying to fill an inkwell This was something 
extraordinary, because everyone marveled that the Gen¬ 
eral's hands did not tremble no matter how sick he was, 
and that his wrist was so steady he still cut and buffed 
his nails once a week and shaved himself every day. 

In his paradise in Lima he had spent a joyous night with 
a voung girl who was covered with fine, straight down 




2I 3 


over every millimeter of her Bedouin skin. At dawn, 
while he was shaving, he looked at her lying naked in the 
bed, adrift in the peaceful sleep of a satisfied woman, 
and he could not resist the temptation of possessing her 
forever with a sacramental act. He covered her from head 
to foot with shaving lather, and with a pleasure like that 
of love he shaved her clean with his razor, sometimes 
using his right hand and sometimes his left as he shaved 
every part of her body, even the eyebrow's that grew 
together, and left her doubly naked inside her magnificent 
newborn’s body. She asked, her soul in shreds, if he really 
loved her, and he answered with the same ritual phrase 
he had strewn without pirv in so many hearts throughout 
his life: 

“More than anyone else in this world.” 

In the town of Solcdad, again while he was shaving, 
he submitted to the same sacrificial rite. He began by 
curling off one of the few limp white locks of hair he 
had left, obeying what seemed to be a childish impulse. 
And then he cut off another in a more conscious way, 
and after that all of them at random, as if he were cutting 
grass, while through the cracks in his voice he declaimed 
his favorite stanzas from La Araucaria, jose Palacios came 
into the bedroom to see whom he was talking to and found 
him shaving his lathered skull. Not a hair was left on his 
head. 

The exorcism did not redeem him. He wore the silk cap 
during the day, and at night he put on the red hood, but 
he could not moderate the icy gusts of despondency. He 
got up to pace through the darkness in the enormous 
moonlit house, only now he could not walk naked on hot 
nights but wrapped himself in a blanket so he would not 



The General in His Labyrinth 


shiver with cold. During the day the blanket was not 
enough, and he resolved to wear the red hood over the 
silk cap. 

The military's quibbling intrigues and the abuses of the 
politicians exasperated him so much that one afternoon 
he decided with a blow to the table that he could not en¬ 
dure any of than any longer. “Tell them I’m consumptive 
so they won't come back/ 1 he shouted. His determination 
was so drastic that he forbade military uniforms and 
rituals in the house, But he could not survive without 
them, so that the consolatory interviews and sterile secret 
meetings continued as always, against his own orders. 
And then he felt so ill that he agreed to a doctor's visit on 
the condition that he not examine him or ask him questions 
about his pains or attempt to give him anything to drink. 

“just to talk/' he said 

1 he physician selected could not have been more to 
his liking. Hercules Gastelbondo was an immense, placid 
old man, anointed with contentment, whose skull was 
radiant with total baldness and who possessed the patience 
of a drowned man, which in itself alleviated the suffering 
of others. His incredulity and scientific daring were fa¬ 
mous all along the coast. He prescribed chocolate cream 
with melted cheese for disturbances of the bile, he ad¬ 
vised lovemaking during the languors of digestion as a 
fine palliative promoting long life, and he smoked endless 
wagon drivers* cigars, w hich he rolled with rag paper and 
prescribed to his patients for all sorts of equivocations of 
the body. The patients themselves said he never effected 
a complete cure but entertained rhem instead with his 
florid eloquence. He would break into plebeian laughter. 





215 

“Other doctors lose as many patients as! do,” he would 
say. “But with me they die happier." 

He arrived in the carriage of Sehor Bartolome Aloli- 
narcs, which came and went several times a day carrying 
all kinds of spontaneous visitors until the General pro¬ 
hibited their coming without an invitation. He arrived 
dressed in wrinkled white linen, making his way through 
the rain, his pockets overflowing with things to eat, and 
carrying an umbrella so full of holes that it invited more 
water than it held back. The first thing he did after 
the formal greetings was to beg pardon for the stench 
of his half-smoked cigar. The General, who could not 
abide tobacco smoke, not then or ever, had already for¬ 
given him. 

“I’m used to it," he said. “Manuela smokes cigars more 
disgusting than yours, even in bed, and of course she’s 
closer to me than you are when she blows the smoke.” 

Dr. Gastelbondo seized an opportunity that burned his 
soul. 

“Of course," he said. “How is she?” 

“Who?” 

“Dona Manuela.” 

The General’s reply was abrupt. 

“All right." 

And he changed the subject in so obvious a manner 
that the doctor laughed out loud ro conceal his imperti¬ 
nence. There was no doubt the General knew that none 
of his gallant escapades was safe from the gossip of his 
entourage. He never boasted about his conquests, but 
there had been so many, and they had been so flagrant, 
that the secrets of his bedroom were public knowledge. 




The General in His Labyrinth 


An ordinary letter took three months to travel from Lima 
to Caracas, but the gossip about his adventures seemed 
to fly with the speed of thought. Scandal followed him 
like a second shadow, and his lovers were marked forever 
w ith a cross of ashes, but he complied with the useless 
duty of protecting ! is secrets of love under a sacred code. 
No one ever heard an indiscretion from him regarding 
a woman he had made love to except Jose Palacios, who 
was his accomplice in everything—not even to satisfy a 
curiosity as innocent as Dr Gastelbondo s, not even con- 
cerning Manuela Saenz, whose intimacy with him was so 
public that there was little left to hide. 

Except for that momentary unpleasantness, Dr. Gastel- 
bondo was a providential presence. He revived him with 
his learned lunacies, he shared with him the honey-dipped 
candies, the almond-paste confections, the chocolate and 
cassava drops he carried in his pockets, which the General 
accepted out of courtesy and ate out of distraction. One 
day he complained that These salon sweets were good 
only for staving off hunger but not for gaining back 
weight, which is what he desired. "Don't worry, i -\cel- 
lency,” the doctor replied. “Everything that enters the 
mouth adds weight, and everything that leaves it is de¬ 
based.’ The argument seemed so amusing to the Genera! 
that he agreed to drink a large glass of wine and a cup of 
arrowroot with the doctor. 

Nevertheless, the humor improved by the doctor with 
so much painstaking care was disturbed by bad news. 
Someone told the General that, fearing contagion, the 
owner of the house where he had lived in Cartagena had 
burned the cot he slept in, the mattress and the sheets, and 
everything that had passed through his hands during his 


217 

stay. He ordered Don Juan de Dios Ai lador ro use the 
money he had left with him to reimburse the owner for 
the destroyed items as if they were new and to pay for 
the rental of the house. But not even this could appease 
his bitterness. 

He felt worse a few days later when he learned that 
Don Joaquin Mosquera had passed through the area on 
his way to the United States and had not deigned to visit 
him. By questioning various people without concealing 
his disquiet, he learned that in fact Mosquera had been 
on the coast for more than a week while he waited for the 
ship, seen many mutual friends as well as some enemies, 
and expressed to ail of them his resentment of what he 
termed the General’s ingratitude. At the moment they 
weighed anchor, when he was already in the launch that 
would carry him to the ship, he had summarized his fixed 
idea for everyone who came to sec him off. 

“Never forget,' he told them. “Thar man doesn't love 
anybody." 

lose Palacios knew how sensitive the General was to 
such reproaches. Nothing pained or bewildered him more 
than people casting doubt on his affections, and he was 
capable of parting oceans and moving mountains with the 
terrible power of his charrn until he convinced them of 
their error. During the plenitude of his glory, Delfina 
Guardinla, the belle of Angostura, became enraged by his 
inconstancy and slammed the doors of her house in his 
face. '‘You’re a great mart, General, greater than anyone," 
she told him. “But love is still too big for you.” He climbed 
through the kitchen window and spent three days with 
her, and he almost lost a battle as well as his life while 
he was persuading Delfina to trust in his heart. 




The General in His Labyrinth 


Mosquera was beyond his reach, but he spoke about 
his rancor to everyone he could find. He never wearied of 
asking how a man had the right to talk of love who had 
permitted the General to be notified by official com¬ 
munique that Venezuela had resolved to repudiate and 
exile him. *"He should be thankful I didn't respond and 
saved him from the condemnation of history/' he shouted. 
He recalled everything he had done for iVlosquera, how 
much he had helped him become who he was, how he 
had been obliged to tolerate the stupidities of his rural 
narcissism. At last he wrote a long, desperate letter to a 
mutual friend to make certain the sound of his indigna¬ 
tion would reach Mosquera anywhere in the world. 

On the other hand, the news he did not receive shrouded 
him like an invisible fog. Urdaneta still had not answered 
his letters. Briceno Mendez, his man in Venezuela, had 
sent him a letter along with some of the Jamaican fruits 
he was so fond of, but the messenger had drowned. The 
inaction of Justo Briceno, his man on the eastern frontier, 
drove him to de^ pair* Urdaneta s silence had cast a shadow 
over the country. The death of Fernandez Madrid, his 
correspondent in London, had cast a shadow over the 
world. 

What the General did not know was that while Ur - 
daneca sent him no news, he maintained an active corre¬ 
spondence with the officers of his entourage, encouraging 
them to extract from him an unequivocal response. He 
wrote to O'Leary: “I need to know once and for all if 
the General does or does not accept the presidency, or if 
we will spend the rest of our lives chasing after an un¬ 
reachable phantom*” O’Leary as well as others around 





him tried to hold casual conversations that would provide 
some answer for Urdaneta, but the General’s evasions 
were insurmountable. 

When at last definitive news was received from Rio- 
hacha, it was more serious than any evil premonition. 
General Manuel Valdes, according to plan, had taken 
the city without resistance on October 20, but the fol¬ 
lowing week Carujo wiped out two of his reconnais¬ 
sance companies. Valdes presented what was intended 
as an honorable resignation to Monrilla, hur the General 
thought it ignoble. “That sw'inc, he’s dying of fright,” 
he said. In only two weeks they were to attempt the cap¬ 
ture of Maracaibo, according to the original plan, but 
simple control of Riohacha was by now an impossible 
dream. 

“God damn it!” shouted the General, “The cream of 
my generals haven't been able to put down a barracks 
revolt.” 

Nevertheless, the news that affected him most was 
that the people fled at the approach of government troops 
because they identified them with the General, whom 
they considered the murderer of Admiral Padilla, an idol 
in his native Riohacha. This calamity, moreover, seemed 
to coincide with others throughout the country. Anarchy 
and chaos raged everywhere, and Urdaneta’s government 
was incapable of controlling them. 

On the day he found the General hurling biblical 
curses at a special emissary who had just brought the 
latest news from Santa Fe de Bogota, Dr. Gastelbondo 
was amazed once again at the revivifying power of rage. 
“The government’s not worth shit! Instead of engaging 


The General in His Labyrinth 


the people and the men who matter, it paralyses them,” 
the General shouted. “It will fall again, and it will not rise 
up a i bird time, because the men who form it and the 
masses who sustain it will be exterminated.” 

The physician's attempts to calm him were futile, for 
when he finished lashing out against the government he 
began, at the top of his lungs, to go down the black list 
of his staff. He said that Colonel Joaquin Barriga. hero of 
three major battles, was capable of anything: “Even mur¬ 
der.” He said that Genera! Pedro Margueytio, whom he 
suspected of taking part in the conspiracy to kill Sucre, 
w as not competent to command troops. He stashed Gen¬ 
eral Gonzalez, his most devoted follower in Cauca, with 
a brutal: “His diseases are feebleness and farting,” He 
collapsed, gasping, into the rocking chair to give his heart 
the rest it had needed for twenty years. Then he saw Dr. 
Gastclbondo standing paralyzed with astonishment in the 
doorway, and he raised his voice. 

“After all,” he said, “what can you expect of a man who 
gambled away two houses at dice?” 

Dr. Gastelbondo was perplexed. 

“Whom are we ralking about?" he asked. 

“L'rdaneta.” said the General. “He lost them in Mara¬ 
caibo to a navy commander, but he made it appear on the 
documents as if he had sold them.” 

He took in the air he needed. “Of course they're all 
saints compared to the slippery’ bastard Santander,” he 
continued. “His friends stole money from the English 
loans, they bought state bonds for a tenth of their real 
value, and the state bought them back at one hundred 
percent.” He explained that in any event he had not 
opposed the loans for fear of corruption but because he 



22 1 


knew they threatened the independence that had cost so 
much blood. 

*i despise debt more than I do the Spanish/’ he said. 

that's why I warned Santander that whatever good we 
had done for the nation would be worthless if we took on 
debt because we would go on paying interest till the end 
of rime. Now it's clear: debt will destroy us in the end/' 

In the early days of the current government he not only 
had agreed with Urdaneta s decision to respect the lives 
of the defeated but had celebrated it as a new war ethic: 
“Our present enemies should not do to us what we did 
to the Spanish/’ That is, w age war to the death. But dur¬ 
ing his dark nights in Soledad he reminded Urdaneta in a 
terrible letter that every civil war had been won by the 
side that was most savage. 

“Believe me, my dear Doctor/’ he told the physician. 
"Our authority and our lives cannot be saved except at 
the cost of our enemies’ blood/’ 

Then, with as little warning as when it began, his rage 
passed without a trace, and the General undertook the 
historical absolution of the officers he had just insulted. 
“In any case, I am the one who is wrong / 1 he said. “They 
only wanted to win independence, something immediate 
and concrete, and damned if they haven’t done that very 
well!" He stretched out a hand chat was just skin and bone 
so the doctor could help him to stand, and he concluded 
with a sigh: 

“But I’ve become lost in a dream, searching for some- 
thing char doesn't exist/' 

It was during this time that he decided Iturbide's fate. 
Toward the end of October Iturbide received a letter 
from his mother, who still lived in Georgetown, telling 


The General in His Labyrinth 


him that the progress made by rhe liberal forces in Mexico 
had moved the family further and further away from 
any hope of repatriation. This uncertainty, added to rhe 
doubts he had carried with him since childhood, became 
unbearable. One afternoon, when the General was walk¬ 
ing along the corridor leaning on Iturbkle’s arm, he hap¬ 
pened to evoke an unexpected memory. 

“I have only one bad recollection of Mexico," he said. 
“In Veracruz the harbor captain’s mastiffs tore apart two 
pups I was taking with me to Spain." 

In any event, he said, that was his first experience of 
the world, and it had marked him forever. Veracruz was 
supposed to be a brief stopover on his first trip to Europe, 
in February 1799, but his stay lasted almost two months 
because of an iEnglish blockade of Havana, which was the 
next port of call. The delay gave him time to travel by 
coach to Mexico City, climbing almost three thousand 
meters between snowcapped volcanoes and hallucina¬ 
tory deserts, which were nothing like the pastoral dawns 
of the Aragua Valley, where he had lived until then. 
“I thought it was how the moon must look,” he said. In 
Mexico City he was amazed at the purity of the air, daz¬ 
zled by the profusion and cleanliness of the public mar¬ 
kets, where red maguey worms, armadillos, river worms, 
mosquito eggs, grasshoppers, the larvae of black ants, 
wildcats, water beetles in honey, corn wasps, cultivated 
iguanas, rattlesnakes, all kinds of birds, midget dogs, and 
a strain of beans that jumped without stopping, as if they 

had a life of their own, were all sold as food. “They eat 

■* 

everything that moves/’ he said. He was astounded by 
rhe clear waters of the numerous canals crossing the city, 



223 


the boats painted in Sunday colors, the splendor and abun¬ 
dance of the flowers* But he was depressed by the short 
February days, the taciturn Indians, the eternal drizzle, 
everything that would later oppress his heart in Santa 
Fc dc Bogota, in Lima, in La Paz, up and down the entire 
length and height of the Andes, which he suffered then 
for the first time. I [re Bishop, to whom he brought letters 
of introduction, took him by the hand to an audience with 
the Viceroy, who seemed more episcopal than the Bishop 
and paid almost no attention to the thin, dark boy who 
dressed like a dandy and declared his admiration for the 
French Revolution, 'It could have cost me my life," the 
General said in amusement “But perhaps I thought one 
had to say something about politics to a viceroy, and at 
the age of sixteen that was all I knew*" Before continu¬ 
ing his journey he wrote to iiis uncle, Don Pedro Palaeio 
y Sojo, the first of his letters that would be preserved* 
“My handwriting was so bad even I couldn't read it," he 
said, weak with laughter* “But I explained to my uncle 
that the fatigue of travel made it look the way it did." 
In a page and a half he made fort) 1 spelling mistakes, two 
of them in the same word: u sunn ,T for “son/ 1 

Iturbide could not comment, for his memory had noth- 
ing to remember. Alt he retained of Mexico was a recol¬ 
lection of misfortunes that had worsened his congenital 
melancholy, and the General had reason to understand 
this* 

“Don't stay with Urdaneta," he told him. “And don't 
go with your family to the United States. It’s omnipotent 
and terrible, and its tale of liberty will end in a plague of 
miseries for us all*" 



The General in His Labyrinth 


\ he effect of his words was to throw yet another doubt 
into a swamp of uncertainty. Iturbide exclaimed: 

“Don’t frighten me. Genera!!” 

“Don’t be frightened," said the General in a calm voice, 
“Go to Mexico, even if they kill you or even if you die. 
And go now while you’re still young, because one day 
it will be too late, and then you won’t feel at home here 
or there. You'll feel like a stranger everywhere, and 
that’s worse than being dead.” He looked him straight 
in the eye, placed his open hand on his own chest, and 
concluded: 

“Just look at me.” 

And so i turbide left at the beginning of December with 
two letters for Urdaneta. In one of them the General said 
that Iturbide, Wilson, and Fernando were the most trust¬ 
worthy people in his house. He stayed in Santa Ke de 
Bogota with no fixed destination until April of the fol¬ 
lowing year, when Urdaneta was deposed by a Santan- 
derist conspiracy. With her exemplary persistence, his 
mother arranged fur him to be named secretary of the 
Mexican legation in Washington. He spent the rest of 
his life in the oblivion of public service, and nothing was 
heard of the family until thirty-two years later, when 
Maximilian of f lapsburg, installed as Emperor of Mexico 
bv French arms, adopted two Irurbide boys of the third 
generation and named them as successors to his chimerical 
throne. 

In the General's second letter to Urdaneta he asked that 
all his past and future lerrers be destroyed so that no trace 
would remain of his dark hours. Urdaneta did not oblige 
the General, who had made a similar request to General 



22 5 


Santander five years before: ‘Don't have niy letters pub¬ 
lished, whether I'm alive or dead, because they arc writ¬ 
ten with a good deal of freedom and disorder*" He was 
not obliged by Santander either, whose letters, unlike 
those of the General, were perfect in form and content, 
and it was evident at first glance that he wrote them with 
the awareness that their ultimate destination was history. 

Starting with the letter from Veracruz and ending with 
the last one he dictated, six days before his death, the 
General wrote at least ten thousand letters, some in his 
own hand, others dictated to his secretaries, still others 
composed by them according to his instructions. A little 
over three thousand letters and some eighr thousand docu¬ 
ments with his signature have been preserved. Sometimes 
he drove his secretaries mad. Or vice versa. Once he 
thought a letter he had just dictated was not written in a 
fair hand, and instead of ordering another copy he himself 
added a line about the secretary: *\\s you must realize, 
Martell is more imbecilic than ever today." In 1817. on 
the eve of his departure from Angostura to complete the 
liberarion of the continent, he brought his governmental 
affairs up-to-date with fourteen documents dictated in 
a single sitting. Perhaps this was the origin of the I L 1 
which has never been disproved, that he would dictate 
several letters to several different secretaries at the same 
time, 

October w as reduced to the sound of rain. He did not 
leave his room again, and Dr, Gasrelbondo had to call on 
his most learned resources so that he would permit the 
doctor to visit and feed him. During the General’s pen¬ 
sive siestas, when he lay in the hammock without moving 




The General m His Labyrinth 


and contemplated the rain in the deserted square, Jose 
Palacios had the impression that he was calling to mind 
even the smallest details of his past life* 

“Merciful God/' he sighed one afternoon, “What has 
happened to Manuda!" 

“All we know is that she's well, because we haven’t 
heard anything about her," said Jose Palacios* 

For a silence had surrounded her ever since Urdaneta 
assumed power. The General had not written to her again, 
but he instructed Fernando to keep her up-to-date on 
their journey. Her last letter had arrived late in August, 
and it contained so much confidential news concerning 
preparations for the military coup that between her il¬ 
legible writing and the deliberate obfuscation of facts in 
order to throw the enemy off the track, it was not easy to 

unravel its mysteries. 

* 

Forgetting the General’s good advice, and with thor¬ 
ough and perhaps excessive jubilation, Manucla had as¬ 
sumed her role as the nation's leading Bolivarist and 
unleashed her own paper war against the government. 
President Mosqucra did not dare take action against her, 
hut he did not prevent his ministers from doing so. Ma- 
nuela responded to the aggressions of the official press with 
printed diatribes that she distributed on horseback, es¬ 
corted by her slavcwomcn, along the Calie Real. Her 
lance at the ready, she pursued those who distributed 
broadsides against the General down the cobbled alleys 
of the outlying districts, and with even more insulting 
slogans she covered over the painted insults that appeared 
every dav on the walls. 

In the end, the official war was waged against her in 
her own name. But she did nor flinch. Her confidants 




227 


inside the government informed her, on a day of patriotic 
fiestas, that fireworks were being mounted on the main 
square with a caricature of the General dressed as the 
king of fools, JVlanucla and her slavewomcn rode rough¬ 
shod over rhe guards and knocked down the structure in a 
cavalry charge. Then the Mayor himself, at the head of a 
squad of soldiers, tried to arrest her in her bed, but she 
was waiting for them with a pair of cocked pistols, and 
mediation by friends of both parties was all that prevented 
an even greater misfortune* 

The only thing that placated her was General Ur- 
danera’s assumption of power. She had a true friend in 
him, and Urdaneta had in her his most enthusiastic ac¬ 
complice. When she was alone in Santa Fe de Bogota, 
while the General was fighting in the south against the 
Peruvian invaders, Urdaneta was the trusted friend who 
saw to her safety and attended to her needs. When the 
General made his unfortunate statement in the Admirable 
Congress, it was Manuela who convinced him to write to 
Urdaneta: “1 offer you all my old friendship and an abso¬ 
lute and heartfelt reconciliation/' Urdaneta accepted the 
gallant offer, and after the military coup Manuela re¬ 
turned the favor. She disappeared from public life in so 
absolute a fashion that by the beginning of October the 
rumor was circulating that she had gone to the United 
States, and no one disputed it- And therefore Jose Palacios 
was right: Manuela was fine, because they had heard 
nothing about her. 

During one of those meticulous examinations of the 
past, when he was lost in the rain, sick of waiting and not 
knowing for what or for wdiom, or why, the General 
touched bottom: he cried in his sleep. When Jose Palacios 


The General in His Labyrinth 


heard the quiet sobs he thought they came from the stray 
dog picked up on the river. But they came from his mas¬ 
ter. He was disconcerted because during their long years 
of intimacy he had seen him cry only once, and that had 
been with rage, not with sorrow. He called Captain 
Ibarra, who was standing watch in the corridor, and he 
too listened to the sound of tears. 

“That will help him," said Ibarra, 

“It will help all of us," said Jose Palacios. 

The General slept later than usual. He was not awak¬ 
ened by either the birds in the nearby orchard or the 
church bells, and Jose Palacios bent over the hammock 
several rimes to see if he was breathing. When he opened 
his eyes it was past eight o'clock, and the heat had begun, 

“Saturday, October 16,“ said Jose Palacios. “The Day 
of Purity.” 

The General got up from rhe hammock and looked 
through the window at the solitary, dusty square, the 
church with the peeling walls, the turkey buzzards fight¬ 
ing over the remains of a dead dog. The harshness of rhe 
early sun announced a day of suffocating heat. 

“Lets get out of here." said the General. "I don't want 
to hear the shots of rhe firing squad.” 

Jose Palacios shuddered. He had lived that moment in 
another place and another time, and the General, just as 
he had been then, was barefoot on the rough bricks of the 
floor, wearing long underpants and the sleeping cap on 
his shaved head. It was an old dream repeated in reality. 

"We won’t hear them," said Jose Palacios, and he 
added with deliberate precision: “General Piar was shot 
in Angostura, and not today at five in the afternoon but 
on a day like today thirteen years ago.” 



2*9 


General Manuel Piar, a hard mulatto from Curasao 
who at the age of thirty-five had earned as much glory 
as anyone in the national militias, had put the General's 
authority to the test at a time when the liberating army 
required its forces united as never before in order to stop 
Morillo's advances. Piar called on blacks, mulattoes, zam- 
bos, and all the destitute of the country to resist the white 
aristocracy of Caracas, personified by the General. Piar’s 
popularity and messianic aura were comparable only to 
those of Jose Antonio Paez, or the royalist Boves, and he 
even made a favorable impression on some white officers 
in the liberating army. The General had exhausted all his 
arts of persuasion, and on his orders Piar was arrested 
and brought to Angostura, the provisional capital, where 
the General was entrenched w-ith the officers close to 
him, several of whom would accompany him on his 
final journey along the Magdalena River. A court-martial 
named by him, which included friends of Piar, passed 
summary judgment. Jose Maria Carreho acted as prose¬ 
cutor. Piar’s official advocate did not have to lie when 
he praised him as one of the outstanding heroes in the 
struggle against the power of Spain. He was declared 
guilty of desertion, insurrection, and treason, and was 
condemned to death and the loss of his military titles. 
Knowing his merits, no one believed that the sentence 
would be confirmed by the General, least of all at a time 
when Morillo had recaptured several provinces and mo¬ 
rale was so low among the patriots that there was fear of 
a rout. The General was subjected to every kind of pres¬ 
sure, he listened with cordiality to the opinions of his 
closest friends, Briceno Mendez among them, but his de¬ 
termination was unshakable. He revoked the sentence of 


The General in His Labyrinth 


demotion and confirmed the sentence of death by firing 
squad, which he made even worse by ordering a public 
execution. It was an endless night when anything evil 
could happen. On Ocrober 16, at five o'clock in the af¬ 
ternoon, the sentence was carried out under the brutal 
sun in the main square of Angostura, the city that Piar 
himself had wrested from the Spanish six months before. 
The commander of the firing squad had ordered the re¬ 
moval of the remains of a dead dog that the turkey buz¬ 
zards were devouring, and he had the gates closed to keep 
stray animals from disrupting the dignity of the execu¬ 
tion* He denied Piar the final honor of giving the order to 
fire and blindfolded him against his will, but he could 
not prevent him from bidding farewell to the world with 
a kiss to the crucifix and a salute to the flag. 

The General had refused to witness the execution. 
The only man with him in his house was Jose Palacios, 
who saw him struggling to hold back the tears when he 
heard the volley. In his proclamation to the troops he 
said: * l Yesterday was a day of sorrow for me. For the 
rest of his life he would repeat that it was a political neces¬ 
sity that saved the country, persuaded the rebels, and 
avoided civil war. In any case, it was the most savage use 
of power in his life, but the most opportune as well* for 
with it he consolidated his authority, unified his command, 
and cleared the road to his glory* 

Thirteen years later, in the town of Soledad, he did not 
even seem to realize that he had been the victim of one of 
time s caprices. He continued to look out at the square 
until an old woman in rags crossed the plaza, leading a 
burro loaded down with coconuts to be sold for their 
milk, and the turkey buzzards were frightened away by 


231 


their shadows. Then he returned to the hammock with 
a sigh of relief, and without anyone's asking he gave the 
answer that Jose Palacios had wanted to hear ever since 
the tragic night in Angostura. 

“I would do it again,” he said. 


the greatest danger was walking, not because 
of the risk of a fall but because the effort it cost him was 
too evident. On the other hand, it was reasonable for 
someone to help him up and down the stairs in the house 
even if he was capable of doing it alone. Nevertheless, 
when he in fact needed an arm to lean on he did not 
allow anyone to offer him one. 

“Thank you," he would sav, “but I can still do it my¬ 
self.” 

One day he could not. He was about to descend a flight 
of stairs alone when the world disappeared. “I lost my 
footing, I don’t know how, I was half dead,” he told a 
friend. It was worse than that: it was a miracle he did not 
kill himself, because the fainting spell threw him against 
the side of the stairs, and he did not roll all the way 
down only because his body was so light. 

Dr, Gastclbondo rushed him to Barranca de San Nico¬ 
las in the carriage of Don Bartolome Molinares, who had 
housed the General on an earlier visit and had ready for 
him the same large, airy bedroom facing Calle Ancha. 


The General in His Labyrinth 


On the way a thick substance that gave him no peace 
began to ooze from his left tear duct. He was detached 
from everything as he traveled, and at times he seemed 
to be praying when in reality he was murmuring entire 
stanzas from his favorite poems. The doctor wiped his 
eye wirh his handkerchief, surprised that the General 
did not do it himself since he was so punctilious about his 
personal cleanliness. He barely roused himself at the en¬ 
trance to the city when a herd of runaway cows almost 
trampled the carriage and did, in fact, overturn the ber- 
Un belonging to the parish priest, who somersaulted into 
the air and then leaped to his feet, white with sand from 
head to toe, and with his forehead and hands bloodied. 
When he recovered from the shock, the grenadiers had to 
open a path through the idle onlookers and naked chil¬ 
dren who wanted only to enjoy the accident and had no 
idea of the identity of the passenger who looked like a 
seated corpse in the darkness of the carriage. 

The doctor introduced the priest as one of the few who 
had supported the General in the days when the bishop 
thundered against him from their pulpits and he was ex¬ 
communicated for being a lecherous Mason. The General 
did not seem to understand what had happened and only 
became aware of the world when he saw blood on the 
cassock of the priest, who asked him to intervene with 
his authority to keep cows from wandering loose in a city 
where it was no longer possible to walk in safety because 
of all the carriages on public thoroughfares. 

“Don't let it bother you. Your Reverence,” he said 
without looking at him. “It’s the same all over the coun¬ 
try.” 

The eleven o’clock sun hung motionless over the sand- 



235 


pirs of the wide, desolate srreers, and the entire cirv re¬ 
verberated with heat. The General was glad he did not 
have to spend more time there than necessary to recu¬ 
perate from the fail, and he wanted to go out sailing on 
a day when the seas were rough, because the French 
manual said that seasickness was good for ridding the body 
of bilious humors and cleansing the stomach. He soon 
recovered from the fall, but it was not so easy to arrange 
for a boat and bad weather. 

In a fury at his body's recalcitrance, the General did 
not have strength for any social or political activity, and 
if he received visitors they were old friends who came to 
the city to say goodbye. The house was large and as cool 
as November would allow, and its owners converted it 
into his personal hospital. Don Barrolome Molinares was 
one of the many people ruined by the wars that had left 
him with nothing but the position of postmaster, which 
he had held for the past ten years without pay. He was 
such a kindhearted man that the General had called him 
Papa ever since his previous visit to the city. His wife, a 
splendid-looking woman with an indomitable matriarchal 
vocation, spent her hours making bobbin lace, which she 
sold at a good price on the European ships, but from the 
moment the General arrived she devoted all her time to 
him, to the point where she came into conflict with Fer¬ 
nanda Barriga because she put olive oil in his lentils, con¬ 
vinced that it was good for diseases of the chest, and he 
was obliged to eat them out of gratitude. 

What bothered the General most during this time was 
the oozing tear duct, which kept him in a somber frame 
of mind until he at last agreed to chamomile eyewashes. 
After that he joined the card games, an ephemeral conso- 


The General in His Labyrinth 


lation for the torment of the mosquitoes and the sorrows 
of twilight During a half-serious conversation with the 
owners of the house, he surprised them by declaring, in 
one of his few crises of repentance, that one good agree¬ 
ment was worth a thousand successful lawsuits, 

€t ln politics too? 1 ' asked Senor Molinares. 

“Above all in politics/' said the 11 General, “Qur not 
making peace with Santander has ruined us all/’ 

“As long as you have friends there is hope/' said Moli¬ 
nares, 

“On the contrary/' said the General “ft was not the 
perfidy of my enemies but the diligence of my friends 
that destroyed my glory* It was they who launched me 
on the calamity of the Oca ha Convention* who entangled 
me in the disaster of the monarchy, who obliged me first 
to seek reelection with the same arguments they later used 
to force my renunciation, and who now hold me captive 
in this country when I no lunger have any reason to 
be here/' 

The rain became eternal, and the humidity began to 
open cracks in his memory,'! he heat was so intense that 
even at night the General had to change his drenched 
shirt several times. “I feci as if IVe been cooked in a dou¬ 
ble boiler/ 1 he complained. One afternoon he spent more 
than three hours sitting on the balcony and watching the 
debris of the poor districts wash dowm the street—the 
household utensils and dead animals swept away by the 
torrent of a seismic downpour that endeavored to pult up 
houses by their roots. 

Commander Juan Glen* the prefect of the city, arrived 
in the middle of the storm with the news that he had 



*37 


arrested a woman in Senor VisbaTs service for selling 
as holy relics the hair the General had cut off in Sole- 
dad. Once again he became despondent at che sorrowful 
thought that everything of liis would turn into goods 
for sale. 

They already treat me as if I had died/' he said. 

Sehora Molinares had pulled her rocking chair up to 
the card table so she could hear every word. 

“They treat you like what you arc, 1 ' she said. “A 
saint." 

"Well,” he said, “if that's the case, they should let 
that poor innocent go," 

He did not read again. If he had to write letters he was 
satisfied with giving instructions to Fernando, and he 
did not even look at rhe few he had to sign. He spent the 
morning on the balcony, contemplating the sand desert 
of the streets, watching the water burro pass by, and the 
brazen, cheerful black woman who sold sun-dried mo* 
jarra fish, and the children leaving school at the stroke of 
eleven, and the parish priest in his tattered, patched cas¬ 
sock, who blessed him from the atrium of the church and 
was melting in the heat. At one o'clock, while the others 
were taking their siestas, he walked along the putrefying 
gutters, frightening away with his mere shadow the flocks 
of turkey buzzards from the market, greeting the few 
people who recognized him even though he was half dead 
and wore civilian clothes, walking as far as the grenadiers' 
barracks, a large shed of cane and mud that faced the river 
port. He was concerned for the morale of the troops, who 
were rotting with a boredom that seemed far too evident 
in rhe disorder of the barracks, where the stench had be- 




The Gejieral in His Labyrinth 


come unbearable. But a sergeant, who appeared to be in 
a stupor because of the suffocating afternoon heat, left 
him flabbergasted with the truth. 

"What’s fucked us up isn't morale, Excellencyhe 
told him. “It’s gonorrhea.’’ 

Only then did he learn the facts. The local doctors, 
having exhausted their science with distracting enemas 
and milk sugar palliatives, had passed the problem on to 
the military authorities, who could not agree on what 
to do. The whole city was aware of the danger that 
threatened it, and the glorious Army of the Republic was 
seen as the emissary of a plague. The General, less alarmed 
than had been feared, resolved the matter with one stroke 
by imposing an absolute quarantine. 

When the lack of news, either good or bad, began to 
drive him to despair, a courier on horseback brought an 
obscure message from General Montilla in Santa Marta: 

! lie man is ours and negotiations are going well.” The 
General thought the message so strange, and its form so 
irregular, that he interpreted it as a staff matter of the 
greatest significance, perhaps related to the Riohacha cam¬ 
paign, to which he attributed a historic importance that 
no one wished to contemplate. 

Ever since governmental neglect destroyed the systems 
of ciphered messages that had proved so useful during the 
first conspiracies against Spain, it was normal at this time 
to intentionally obscure messages and muddle military 
dispatches for reasons of security. Hie idea that the mili¬ 
tary were deceiving him was a long-standing concern of 
his that was shared by Montilla, and this further compli¬ 
cated the enigma of the message and intensified the Gen¬ 
eral’s uneasiness. And therefore he sent Jose Palacios to 




2 39 


Santa A arta on the pretext that he was buying fresh fruits 
and vegetables and a few bottles of dry sherry and pale 
beer nor available in the local market. But the real purpose 
was to decipher the mystery. It was very simple: Mantilla 
meant that Miranda Lyndsay s husband had been trans¬ 
ferred from the prison in Honda to the one in Cartagena 
and that his pardon was a matter of days. The General felt 
so cheated by the simplicity of the enigma that he did 
not even take pleasure in the service he had rendered his 
Jamaican savior. 

liarly in November the Bishop of Santa Marta, in a 
letter written by his own hand, informed him that it had 
been he, with his apostolic mediation, who had at last 
soothed tempers in the nearby town of La Cienaga, where 
an attempt at civil insurrection in support of Riohacha 
had taken place the week before. 1 he General thanked 
him, also in his own hand, and he asked Montilla to do the 
same, but he did not like the Bishop’s haste in calling in 
the debt. 

Relations between the General and Monsignor Estevez 
had never been very easy. Beneath his meek good shep¬ 
herd’s crozier, the Bishop was a passionate but unenlight¬ 
ened politician, oppised deep in his heart to the Republic, 
opposed to the integration of the continent and to every¬ 
thing connected with the General’s political thinking. In 
the Admirable Congress, where he had served as vice- 
president, the Bishop had understood very well that his 
real duty was to obstruct Sucre s power, and he had done 
so with more malice than efficiency, both in the election 
nf officials and in their shared mission to find an amicable 
solution to the conflict with Venezuela. Sehor and Senora 
Molinares, who knew about these disagreements, were not 


The General in His Labyrinth 


at a.i! surprised when the General greeted them at four 
o clock tea with one of his prophetic parables; 

“What will become of our children in a country w r here 
revolutions are ended by the diligence of a bishop?' 1 

Sehora Molinares replied with an affectionate but firm 
reproach: 

“Even if Your Excellency is right, I don't want to hear 
it," she said, “We’re old-style Catholics.” 

He recovered without delay: 

“Much more old-style than the Bishop, no doubt, who 
hasn't reestablished order in La Cienaga for the love of 
God but in order to keep his parishioners united in the 
war against Cartagena/' 

“WeYe opposed to Cartagena’s tyranny here too, 1 ' said 
Senor Molinares. 

M I know,” he said. “Every Colombian is an enemy 
country.” 

In Soledad the General had asked Montilla to send a 
fight boar to the neighboring port of Sabanilla for him to 
use in his plan to expel bile by means of seasickness, Mon¬ 
tilla had delayed satisfying his request because Don Joa¬ 
quin de Mier, a Spanish republican and the partner of 
Commodore Elbcrs, had promised him one of the steam¬ 
boats pressed into occasional service on the Magdalena 
River. When this proved impossible, Montilla sent an 
i ngiish merchant ship that arrived unannounced in Santa 
Marta in mid-November, As soon as he heard the news, 
the General let it be known that he would take advantage 
of the opportunity to leave the country, 4 Tm determined 
to go anywhere rather than die here,” he said. Then he 
was shaken by the presentiment that Camille was waiting 


2 4 I 


for him, watching the horizon from a flower-filled bal¬ 
cony facing the sea, and he sighed: 

“They love me in Jamaica." 

Be instructed Jose Palacios to begin packing, and that 
night he stayed up very late trying to find some papers 
that he wanted to take with him at all costs. Be was so 
exhausted that he slept for three hours. At dawn, when 
his eyes were already open, he became conscious of where 
he was only when Jose Palacios announced the saint’s 
day. 

i dreamed 1 was in Santa Marta," he said. “It was a 
very clean city, with white houses that were all the same, 
but the mountain blocked the view of the sea." 

“Then it wasn't Santa Marta," said Jose Palacios. “It 
was Caracas." 

For the General’s dream had revealed to him that they 
would not go to Jamaica. I ernando had been in the port 
since early that morning arranging the details of the voy¬ 
age, and on his return he found his uncle dictating a let¬ 
ter to Wilson in which he requested a new passport from 
Urdaneta because rhe one issued by the deposed govern¬ 
ment was worthless. That was the only explanation he 
gave for canceling the trip. 

Nevertheless, everyone agreed that the real reason was 
the news he received that morning concerning operations 
in Riohacha, which did nothing but make the earlier re¬ 
ports even more calamitous. The nation was falling apart 
from one ocean to the other, the specter of civil war 
raged over its ruins, and nothing was as distasteful to the 
General as running from adversity. “There is no sacrifice 
we arc not prepared to make to save Riohacha," he said. 



The General in His Labyrinth 


Dr. Gastelbondo, more disturbed by what disturbed the 
invalid than by his incurable diseases, was the only man 
who knew how to tell him the truth without mortify¬ 
ing him. 

“The world’s coming to an end and you worry about 
Riohacha," he said. “We never dreamed we'd be so 
honored.” 

His reply was immediate: 

“The fate of the world depends on Riohacha.” 

He really thought it did, and he could not disguise his 
uneasiness at the fact that they had planned to take Mara¬ 
caibo by this time but instead were further than ever 
from victory. And as December approached with its topaz 
afternoons, he feared not only that Riohacha, and perhaps 
the entire coast, would be lost but that Venezuela would 
mount an expedition to destroy the last vestiges of his 
illusions. 

The weather had begun to change during the previous 
week, and where there had been mournful rains a di¬ 
aphanous sky opened, and the nights were full of stars. 
The General remained detached from the marvels of the 
world, at times preoccupied in the hammock, at times 
playing cards with no concern for his luck. Then, when 
they were playing in the drawing room, a breeze laden 
with sea roses blew the cards out of their hands and made 
the window latches jump. Senora Molinares, exalted by 
this premature announcement of the providential season, 
exclaimed: “It’s December!’’ Wilson and Jose Laurencio 
SiKa hurried to close the windows in order to prevent 
the breeze from carrying away the house. The General 
was the only one who remained preoccupied with his 
fixed idea. 



2 45 


“December already, and we're still in the same place,” 
he said. “They’re right when they say it’s better to have 
bad sergeants than useless generals.” 

He continued playing, and in the middle of the game 
he put his cards to one side and told Jose Laurencin Silva 
to prepare everything for traveling. Colonel Wilson, who 
on the previous day had unloaded his luggage for the sec¬ 
ond time, was perplexed. 

“The boat left,” he said. 

The General knew that. “It wasn’t the right one," he 
said. "We have to go to Riohacha. to see if we can per¬ 
suade our illustrious generals to decide to win at last." 
Before leaving the table he felt obliged to justify himself 
to his hosts. 

“By now it’s not even a necessity of war,” he told them, 
“but a question of honor," 

And so he sailed at eight o’clock in the morning of De¬ 
cember i on the brigantine Manuel, which Scnor Joaquin 
de Mier placed at his disposal to use however he pleased: 
to take a sail to expel bile, to convalesce from his many 
illnesses and countless sorrows on Sehor .\tier's sugar plan¬ 
tation at Sian Pedro Alejandrino, or to continue straight 
on to Riohacha to attempt once again the redemption 
of the Americas. General Mariano .Vontilla, who ar¬ 
rived on the brigantine with General Jose Maria Carreno, 
arranged for the Manuel to be escorted by the North 
American frigate Grampus, which, in addition to being 
well armed, had on board a good surgeon, Dr. Night. 
Nevertheless, when Montilla saw the General's pitiable 
condition, he did not want to be guided by Dr. Night's 
judgment alone, and he consulted his local physician. 

“I don't believe he’ll even survive the crossing,” said 



The General in His Labyrinth 


Dr. Gastelbondo. “But let him go: anything’s better than 
living like this." 

The channels through Cienaga Grande, the great 
swamp, w ere slow and hot and gave off fatal vapors, and 
so they traveled on the open sea, taking advantage of the 
first trade winds from the north, which were early and 
benign that year. A cabin was ready for him on the well- 
inaintaincd square-sailed brigantine, which was clean and 
comfortable and had a lighthearted way in the water. 

! he General boarded in good spirits and wanted to 
remain on deck to see the estuary of the Great Magdalena 
River, whose mud gave an ashen color to the water for 
many leagues out to sea. He was wearing old corduroy 
trousers, the Andean cap, and an English sailor’s jacket 
given him by the captain of the frigate, and his appear¬ 
ance improved in the sunlight and the vagabond breeze. 
In his honor the frigate's crew caught a gigantic shark, 
in whose bellv they found a variety of metal objects, 
including a pair of spurs. He enjoyed everything with a 
tourist's pleasure until he was overcome by fatigue and 
sank down into his own soul. Then he signaled jose Pa¬ 
lacios to approach and whispered in his ear: 

Papa Mol mares must be burning the mattress and 
burying the spoons by now'.’’ 

Toward midday they passed Cienaga Grande, a vast 
extension of muddy waters where all the birds of the air 
fought over a school of golden mojarra. On the burning 
saltpeter plain between the swamp and the sea, where 
the light was clearer and the air was purer, there were 
fishing villages with tackle spread out to dry in the patios, 
and beyond them lay the mysterious town of La Qcnaga, 
whose diurnal phantoms had caused the disciples of Hum- 


H5 


boldt to doubt their science. On the other side of Gen- 
aga Grande rose the crown of eternal ice on the Sierra 
Nevada. 

The high-spirited brigantine, almost flying over the 
water in the silence of the sails, was so ijuick and stable 
that it did not cause the convulsion desired by the Gen- 
eral to expel the bile from his body. Nevertheless, when 
they passed a ridge of the Sierra that extended toward the 
sea, the water Turned rough and the wind blustered, I he 
General observed those changes with growing anticipa¬ 
tion, for the world began to spin with the carrion birds 
circling overhead, an icy perspiration soaked his shirt, and 
his eyes filled with tears. Monnlla and Wilson had to hold 
him* for he was so light that a sudden wave could have 
swept him overboard. At dusk, when they entered the 
calm waters of Santa Marta Bay, there was nothing left 
for him to expel from his ravaged body, and he lay ex¬ 
hausted in the captain’s hunk, moribund but in the rap¬ 
ture of a dream come true. General Mantilla was so 
disturbed by his condition that before proceeding with 
disembarkation he had Dr. Night see him again, and the 
physician decided that the General should be carried to 
land in a liner. 

Aside from the Santa Marians' total lack of interest in 
everything that smacked of officialdom, there were «nhtt 
reasons why so few people were waiting on the dock. 
Santa Marta had been one of the most difficult cities to 
lure to the republican cause. K.ven after independence 

was confirmed at the battle oi Boyaea, Viceroy Sarnano 

* 

took refuge there to await reinforcements from Spain. 

The General himself had attempted to liberate Santa 
Marta several times, and only Mnntilla succeeded, after 



The General in His Labyrinth 


the Republic was already established. Royalist rancor was 
added to the animosity everyone felt toward Cartagena 
for being the central government's favored city, a feeling 
the General fomented withour realizing it because of his 
passion for the Camgcnans. The strongest reason, how¬ 
ever, even for many of his loyal supporters, was the sum¬ 
mary execution of Admiral Jose Prudencio i’adilla, who, 
to make matters even worse, had been as much a mulatto 
as General Piar. The bitter feelings deepened with the 
takeover of power by L’rdaneta, who had been president 
of the court-martial that issued the death sentence. And 
so the bells in the cathedral did not ring as planned and 
no one could explain why, and the cannon in El Mor.ro 
Fortress fired no salute because that morning it was dis¬ 
covered that the powder in the arsenal was wet. The 
soldiers had toiled until just before the General's arrival 
so he would not see the “Long Live Jose Prudencio” 
scrawled in charcoal on the side of the cathedral. The 
official announcements of his arrival had almost no effect 
on the handful of men in the port. The most notable ab¬ 
sence was that of Bishop F Steve?., the first and most emi¬ 
nent of the dignitaries who had been informed. 

Don Joaquin de Micr would remember until the end of 
his long life the dreadful creature carried ashore in a litter 
in the lethargy of early evening, wrapped in a woolen 
blanker, wearing one cap over another and both pulled 
down to his eyebrows, and with hardly a breath of life. 
Nevertheless, what he remembered best was his burning 
hand, his labored breathing, the supernatural elegance 
with which he left the litter and stood, holding himself 
upright with the help of his aides-de-camp, to greet them 
all, one by one, with their titles and complete names. 



Then he allowed himself to be carried to the bcrlin and 
collapsed on the seat, his listless head resting on the back 
but his avid eyes drinking in the life that for him was 
passing just one time and forever on the other side of the 
window. 

The line of carriages had only to cross the avenue to 
reach the old customhouse that had been reserved for 
him. It was about to strike eight o'clock on a Wednesday, 
but the first December breezes brought a Saturday air to 
the promenade along the bay. 1 he streets were broad and 
dirty, and the masonry houses with their continuous bal¬ 
conies were better preserved than those in the rest of the 
country. Whole families had brought out furniture and 
sat on the sidewalks, and some even received their visitors 
in the middle of the street. The clouds of fireflies among 
the trees lit the seafront avenue with a phosphorescent 
brilliance more intense than the lamplight. 

Fhe recently restored old customhouse, the first in the 
country, had been built two hundred ninety-nine years 
before. I he bedroom on the second floor, with a view 
of the bay, had been prepared for the General, but he 
preferred to spend most of the time in the principal draw¬ 
ing room, where the only rings for hanging a hammock 
were located. In the same room was the rough, carved 
mahogany table where his embalmed body would lie in 
state sixteen days later, wearing the blue tunic of his rank 
without the eight buttons of pure gold that someone 
would tear off in the confusion of death. 

He was the only one who did not seem to believe he 
was so close to that fate. But Dr, Alexandre Prosper 
Reverend, the French physician brought by General 
Montilla on an emergency call at nine o’clock in the 




The General in His Labyrinth 


evening, did not need to take his pulse to know he had 
begun to die years before. Because of the weakness of his 
neck, the contraction of his chest, and the yellowness of 
his face, the doctor thought it was a case of damaged 
lungs, which was confirmed by his observations in the 
days that followed, in the initial private interview, held 
half in Spanish and half in French, he established that the 
patient possessed a masterful talent for distorting his 
symptoms and misinterpreting his pain, and was using 
the little breath he had left in an effort not to cough or 
spit during the consultation. The initial diagnosis was 
confirmed by clinical examination. But beginning with 
that night’s medical bulletin, the first of the thirty-three 
he would issue during the next two weeks, the physician 
attributed as much importance to moral torment as to 
physical calamities. 

Dr. Reverend, at thirty-four, was self-confident, well 
educated, and well dressed. He had arrived six years ear¬ 
lier, disenchanted with the restoration of the Bourbons 
to the throne of France, and he spoke and wrote correct, 
fluent Spanish, but the General took advantage of the first 
opportunity to demonstrate his good French. The doctor 
captivated him at once. 

“Your Fxccilcncy has a Parisian accent,' he told him. 

“The Rue Vivienne,’’ he said, becoming animated. 
“How did you know?" 

‘'I pride myself on guessing the very street in Paris 
where a person grew up, just by his accent," said the 
physician, “although 1 was born and raised in a village in 
Normandy.” 

“Good cheese but bad wine," said the General. 



‘"Perhaps irs the secret of our good health, said the 
doctor. 

He gained the General's confidence with Ins painless 
sounding of the boyish side of his spirit. He gained ir even 
more when* instead of prescribing new medicines, he ad¬ 
ministered by his own hand a spoonful of the syrup pre¬ 
pared by Dr, Gastelbondo to alleviate his cough, and a 
tranquili/ing pill that the General took with no resistance 
because his desire to sleep was so great. They continued 
chatting about this and that until the soporific took effect 
and the doctor tiptoed out of the room. General Monrilla, 
who accompanied him to his house along with other of¬ 
ficers, was alarmed when the doctor told him he planned 
to sleep in his clothes in the event an emergency arose in 
the middle of the night. 

Reverend and Night held several meetings that week 
but came to no agreement. Reverend was convinced the 
General suffered from a pulmonary lesion whose origin 
was an ill-treated catarrh. Because of his color and evening 
fevers. Dr, Night was convinced it was a case of chronic 
malaria, 1’hey did agree, nevertheless, on the gravity of 
his condition. They requested other doctors to settle their 
differences, but the three from Santa Marta, and others 
from the province, refused to cooperate, giving no expla¬ 
nation, And therefore Drs. Reverend and Night agreed 
on a compromise treatment based on pectoral balms for 
catarrh and doses of quinine for malaria. 

The patient's condition had deteriorated even further 
over the weekend because of a glass of donkey's milk he 
drank on his own account without the doctors' knowl¬ 
edge, His mother would drink it warm with honey, and 



The General in His Labyrinth 


gave it to him when he was very young to ease his cough* 
But that soothing taste* associated in so intimate a way 
with his earliest memories, disturbed his bile and devas¬ 
tated his body, and his prostration was so pronounced 
that Dr Night sailed earlier than planned in order to 
send a specialist from Jamaica* He in fact sent two, who 
were very qualified, and he did so with a speed that was 
incredible for the time, but they arrived too late. 

With it all, the General's state of mind did nor corre¬ 
spond to his prostration, for he behaved as if the diseases 
that were killing him were no more than trivial annoy¬ 
ances. He spent the nights awake in the hammock con¬ 
templating the turns of the light in El Monro Fortress, 
enduring pain so his moans would not betray him, always 
staring at the splendor of the bay that he had considered 
the most beautiful in the world* 

“My eyes hurt from looking at it so much/' he would 
say, 

m 

During the dav he made an effort to show the diligence 
of other times, and he would call Ibarra, or Wilson, or 
Fernando, or whoever was close by. to give instructions 
concerning the letters he no longer had the patience to 
dictate. Only Jose Palacios had a heart lucid enough to 
realize that these pressing matters were the urgencies of 
his last days. For he was arranging the destiny of those 
near to him, and even of some who were not in Santa 
Marta. He forgot the quarrel with his former secretary, 
General Juan Jose Santana, and obtained a position for him 
in the foreign service so he could enjoy his new life as a 
married man. He paid well-deserved tribute to the good 
heart of General Jose Maria Carrcno and sec him on the 
path that would bring him, in time, to the designated 





251 


presidency of Venezuela. He requested Urdaneta to pro¬ 
vide service documents for Andres Ibarra and lose :.au- 
rencio Silva so they could at least enjoy a regular income 
in the future. Silva became General in Chief and Secre¬ 
tary of the Army and Navy in his own country and died 
at the age of eighty-two, his sight clouded by the cata¬ 
racts he had feared so much, and living on a certificate of 
disability he obtained after arduous efforts to prove his 
combat service by means of his numerous scars. 

The General also attempted to convince Pedro Briccno 
Mendez to return to New Granada to become Minister 
of War, but the rush of history did not give him time. 
He left his nephew Fernando a legacy to facilitate his 
career in public administration. He advised General 
Diego Ibarra, his first aide-de-camp and one of the few 
people with whom he used the intimate form of address 
in private and in public, to go where he would be more 
useful than in Venezuela. On his deathbed he would even 
ask General Jusro Briceno, toward whom he still felt 
some resentment, for the last favor of his life. 

His officers may never have imagined to what extent 
this distribution of benefits joined their destinies. For 
better or worse, all of them would share the rest of their 
lives, including the historical irony of being reunired in 
Venezuela five years later, fighting at the side of Com¬ 
mander Pedro Carujo in a military adventure intended to 
achieve the Bolivarist idea of integration. 

These were not political maneuvers but legacies to his 
orphans, which was confirmed by Wilson in the surpris¬ 
ing statement the General dictated in a letter to Urdaneta; 
"The Riohacha enterprise is lost.’ I hat same afternoon 
the General received a note from Bishop Estevez the Un- 



The General in His Labyrinth 


predictable, who asked him to use his good offices with 
the centra] government to have Santa Marta and Rio- 
hacha declared departments, thus putting an end to their 
historic discord with Cartagena, i iie General made a 
dispirited gesture when Jose Laurcncio Silva finished 
reading him the ietter. “The only ideas that occur to 
Colombians are for ways to divide the nation,'' he said. 
Later, as he dispatched back correspondence with Fer¬ 
nando, he was even more bitter. 

' Don’t even answer it," he told him. “Let them wait 
until I’m six feet under, and then they can do whatever 
they like.” 

His constant longing to change the weather kept him 
on the brink of dementia. If it was humid he wanted it 
dry, if it was cold he wanted it milder, if it was moun¬ 
tain weather he wanted it coastal. This heightened his 
perpetual restless desire to have the window opened to 
let in the air and to have it closed again, to have the easy 
chair moved into the light and to have it moved back 
again, and he seemed to find relief only by swaying in the 
hammock with the meager strength remaining to him. 

flic days in Santa Marta became so dismal that when 
the General calmed down somewhat and repeated his 
desire to leave for Senor de Mier’s country house. Dr. 
Reverend was the first to encourage him, aware that 
these were the final symptoms of a prostration from which 
there was no return. The night before the journey the 
General wrote ro a friend; “I will die in a couple of 
months at the latest.' It was a revelation to all of them, 
because on very few occasions in his life, and even less 
in recent years, had anyone heard him mention death. 

La Florida de San Pedro Alejandrino, a league from 



M3 


Santa Alarta in the foothills of the Sierra Nevada, was a 
sugar plantation with a mill for making brown sugar 
loaves, i he General rode in Senor de Mier’s berhn along 
the dusty road. Ten days later the shell of his body, 
wrapped in his old upland blanket and lying in an oxcart, 
would travel the same road in the opposite direction* 
Long before he saw the house he smelled the breeze, heavy 
with hot molasses, and he was ensnared by nostalgia. 

“It s the smell of San Mateo,” he sighed. 

The San Mateo Plantation, twenty-four leagues from 
Caracas, was the center of his longing. I here he lost his 
father at the age of three, his mother at the age of nine, 
and his wife at the age of twenty. He had been married in 
Spain to his kinswoman, a beautiful girl of the American 
aristocracy, and his only dream then was to be happy 
with her while he increased his immense fortune as mas¬ 
ter of life and property on the San Mateo Plantation. It 
was never established with any certainty if the death of 
his w ife eight months after the w edding was caused by a 
malignant fever or a domestic accident. For him it meant 
his birth into history, for he had been a rich young gen¬ 
tleman from the colonies, dazzled by mundane pleasures 
and without the slightest interest in politics, but at that 
moment he became, w f ith no transition, the man he would 
be for the rest of his life, I Ic never spoke of his dead wife 
again, he never recalled her, he never tried to replace her. 
Almost every night of his life he dreamed about the house 
at San Mateo, and he often dreamed of his father and 
mother, his brother and sisters, but he never dreamed 
about her, for he had buried tier at the bottom of a water¬ 
tight oblivion as a brutal means of living without her. 
All that could stir her momentary memory was the smell 


The General in His Labyrinth 


of molasses at San Pedro Alejandrino, the impassivity of 
the slaves in the mills, who did not cast so much as a 
pitying glance in his direction, che immense trees around 
the house that had just been whitewashed to receive him, 
the other mill in his life, where an ineluctable destiny was 
taking him to die, 

"Her name was Maria Teresa Rodriguez del Toro y 
Alayza/ 1 he said without warning. 

Senor de Mier was at a loss. 

"Who?” he asked. 

"The woman who was my wife," he said, and then his 
reaction was immediate: "But forget it. please: it was a 
misfortune of my youth/ 1 

That was all he said. 

The bedroom that had been prepared for him gave rise 
to another deviation of memory, causing him to examine 
it with meticulous attention as if each object were a reve¬ 
lation, In addition to the canopied bed there was a ma¬ 
hogany bureau, a mahogany mght table with a marble 
top, and an armchair covered in red velvet, (>n the wall 
next to the window was an octagonal clock with Roman 
numerals, which had stopped at seven minutes past one, 

"We've been here before/ 1 he said. 

Later, when Jose Palacios wound the dock and set it 
for the correct time, the General lay down in the ham¬ 
mock, trying to sleep for a moment. Only then did he 
see the clear, blue Sierra Nevada through the window, 
like a painting hung on che wall, and his memory wan¬ 
dered to other rooms from so many other lives. 

'Tvc never felt so close to home/ 1 he said. 

His sleep was sound the first night at San Pedro Ale¬ 
jandrino, and the next day he seemed to have recovered 



2 55 


so well from his maladies rhar he visited the mills, admired 
the breeding of the oxen, tasted the honey, and surprised 
everyone with his knowledge of the arts of milting sugar. 
General Montill a, astonished at such a change, asked 
Reverend to tell him the truth, and the latter explained 
that the General's imaginary improvement was frequent 
in dying men. The end was a matter of days, perhaps 
hours. Stunned by the bad news, Montilia smashed the 
bare wall with his fist and broke his hand. For the rest 
of his life it would never be the same again. He had often 
bed to the General, always in good faith and for trivial 
political reasons. From that day on he lied to him our 
of charity and instructed those who had access to the 

|F 

General to do the same. 

That week eight high-ranking officers expelled from 
Venezuela for activities against the government arrived 
in Santa Marta. Among them were several great heroes 
of the epic of liberation: Nicolas Silva, Trinidad Porto- 
earrero, Julian Infante. Montilia asked them not only to 
keep bad news from the dying General but to enhance 
the good in search of solace for the most serious of his 
many misfortunes. They went even further and made so 
encouraging a report on the situation in their country 
that they were able to rekindle the old fire in his eyes. 

The General returned to the topic of Riohacha* banished 
from conversation for the past week, and he spoke again 
of Venezuela as an imminent possibility. 

14 We've never had a better opportunity to start over 
again on the right path," he said. And he concluded with 
irrefutable conviction: “The day 1 set foot in the Aragua 
Valley, the entire Venezuelan nation will rise up in my 
favor/’ 



The General in His Labyrinth 


In a single afternoon he outlined a new military strategy 
in the presence of the visiting officers, who offered the 
assistance of their compassionate enthusiasm. Neverthe¬ 
less, for the rest of the night they had to listen to him 
declaim in a prophetic tone just how they would rebuild 
from the beginning, and this time forever, the vast empire 
of his dreams. Montiila was the only one who dared to 
dispute the utter disbelief of those w ho thought they 
were listening to the ravings of a madman, 

“Watch out," he told them. “That's w hat they thought 
at Casacoima.’' 

For no one had forgotten July 4 , 1817 , when the Gen¬ 
eral had been forced to spend the night in the waters of 
Casacoima Lagoon, together with a small group of offi¬ 
cers, Briceno .Mendez among them, hiding from the Span¬ 
ish troops who had almost taken them by surprise in open 
country, i (alf naked and shivering with fever, he sud¬ 
denly began to declaim at the top of his voice each step 
he would take in the future; the immediate capture of 
Angostura, the crossing of the Andes to liberate New 
Granada and later Venezuela and to found Colombia, and 
at last the conquest of the immense southern territories all 
the wav to Peru. “Then we will climb Chimborazo and 

m 

plant on its snow-covered peaks the tricolor of an America 
that is forever great, united, and free.” he concluded. 
Those w ho heard him in Casacoima also thought he had 
lost his mind, and nevertheless it was a prophecy fulfilled 
in every detail in less than five years. 

Sad to say, the prophecy at San Pedro Alejandrino was 
no more than a vision of dire things to come. The suffer¬ 
ings held at bay during the first week rushed headlong into 
a violent windstorm of total annihilation. By this time 







2 57 


the General had grown so small that the cuffs of his shiit- 
sleeves had to be turned up again and an inch was cut off 
the corduroy trousers. He could not sleep more than 
rhree hours in the early evening, and the rest of the night 
he spent strangled by coughing, or hallucinating in his 
delirium, or driven to despair by the recurrent attacks 
of hiceuping that had begun in Santa Marta and were 
becoming more and more tenacious. In the afternoon, 
while the others napped, he endured his agony by look¬ 
ing through the window at the snowy peaks of the Sierra. 

He had crossed the Atlantic four times and ridden 
through the liberated territories on horseback more than 
anyone would ever do again, and he had never made a 
will, which was unheard-of at that time. “I have nothing 
to leave anyone,” he would say. W hen he was preparing 
for his departure in Santa Fe de Bogota, General Pedro 
Alcantara Her ran had recommended he do so, with the 
argument that it was a normal precaution for every trav¬ 
eler, and the General had told him, more in seriousness 
than in jest, that death was not parr of his immediate 
plans. Nevertheless, at San Pedro Alejandrino, it was he 
who took the initiative and dictated rough drafts of his 
last will and testament. No one ever knew if it was a 
reasoned act or the stumbling of his afflicted heart. 

Because Fernando was ill, he began by dictating to Jose 
Laurencio Silva a series of somewhat disordered notes that 
did not express his desires so much as his disillusionment: 
America is ungovernable, the man who serves a revolu¬ 
tion plows the sea. this nation will fall inevitably into the 
hands of rhe unruly mob and then will pass into the 
hands of almost indistinguishable petty tyrants of every 
color and race, and many other lugubrious thoughts that 



The General in His Labyrinth 


had already circulated as separate ideas in letters to van- 
ous friends. 

He continued dictating for several hours, as if he were 
in a clairvoyant trance, hardly stopping for the attacks 
of coughing, lose Laurencio Silva could not keep up with 
him, and Andres Ibarra could not make the effort of 
writing with his left hand for very long. When all the 
secretaries and aides-de-camp were exhausted, one man, 
a cavalry lieutenant named Nicolas Mariano de Paz, was 
still standing, and he copied out the dictation with me¬ 
ticulous care and a fair hand until there was no paper left. 
He asked for more, but it took so long to arrive that he 
continued copying on the wall until it was almost covered 
with writing, i 'he General was so grateful that he pre¬ 
sented him with the two pistols for ducb of love that had 
belonged to General Lorenzo Carcamo. 

It was his final wish that his remains be taken to Vene¬ 
zuela, that the two books owned by Napoleon be en¬ 
trusted to the University of Caracas, that eight thousand 
pesos be given to jose Palacios in recognition of his con¬ 
stant service, that the papers he had left with Sehor Pava- 
jeau in Cartagena be burned, that the medal with which 
the Congress of Bolivia had honored him be returned to 
irs place of origin, that the gold sword encrusted with 
precious gems given him by Field Marshal Sucre be re¬ 
stored to the Field Marshal's widow, and that the rest 
of his possessions, including the Aroa Mines, be divided 
among his two sisters and the children of his dead brother. 

There was not enough for other bequests, because these 
same possessions had to be used to pay outstanding debts, 
both large and small, including the recurrent nightmare 



259 


of rhe twenty thousand duros owed to Professor Lan- 
caster* 

Among the prescribed clauses, he had been careful 
to include an exceptional one in w hich he thanked Sir 
Robert Wilson for the good behavior and fidelity of his 
son. It was not the distinction that was strange but his not 
having written one as well for General O’Leary, who 
would not be present at his death only because he could 
not arrive in time from Cartagena, where by the Gen¬ 
eral’s order he had remained at the disposal of President 
Urdaneta. 

Both names would be forever linked to rhe General's. 
Wilson would later be British charge d’affaires in Limai 
and then in Caracas, and would continue his frontline 
participation in the political and military affairs of both 
countries. O Leary w ould move to Kingston and later to 
Santa Fc de Bogota, where he would serve as his nation’s 
consul for many years and die at the age of fifty-one, hav¬ 
ing collected in thirty-four volumes an enormous testi¬ 
mony of his life with the General of rhe Americas. His 
u >s ‘ l K ’ fruitful twilight, which he summarized 
in a single sentence: “After The Liberator died and his 
great work was destroyed, I retired to Jamaica, where 
I dedicated myself to arranging his papers and writing 
my memoirs.” * 

hrom the day the General dictated his will, the doctor 
made exhaustive use of all the palliatives known to his 
Science: mustard plasters on his feet, spinal massages, 
anodyne poultices over his entire body. He ameliorated 
the General’s congenital consriparion with enemas of im¬ 
mediate but devastating effect. Fearing a cerebral conges- 



The General in His Labyrinth 


tion, he subjected him to blistering plasters in order to 
drain the catarrh accumulated in his head. This treatment 
consisted of plasters made of blister beetle, a caustic insect 
that, when ground and applied to the skin, produced blis¬ 
ters capable of absorbing medicines. Dr. Reverend ap¬ 
plied five blistering plasters to the back of the neck and 
one ro the calf of the dying Genera l A century and a half 
later, numerous physicians would still think that the im¬ 
mediate cause of death had been these irritating plasters 
that provoked a urinary disorder in which micturition 
was at first involuntary, then painful, and at last bloody, 
until the bladder was left dry and adhered to the pelvis, 
as Dr. Reverend confirmed in the autopsy. 

The General's sense of smell had become so acute that 
he obliged the doctor and the pharmacist, Augusto i oma- 
sin, to keep their distance because they smelled of lini¬ 
ment. Then he had the room sprinkled with more cologne 
than ever, and he continued to take the illusory baths, to 
shave w r irh his own hand, to clean his teeth with fierce 
savagery in a superhuman effort to defend himself against 
the obscene filth of death. 

Colonel Luis Peru dc Lacroix visited Santa Marta dur¬ 
ing the second week in December. He was a young vet¬ 
eran of Napoleon’s armies who until a short while before 
had been aide-de-camp to the General, and after his visit 
the first thing he did was to writ* the truth to .Manuela 
Saenz. As soon as she received the letter Manuela set out 
on the journey to Santa Marta, but in Guaduas they told 
her she w r as a whole lifetime too late. The new’S erased 
her from the world. She sank into her own shadow's, her 
only obligations the two chests of the General’s papers 




26 i 


that she managed to hide in a safe place in Santa Fe de 
Bogota until, on her instructions, Daniel O’Leary rescued 
them several years later. General Santander, in one of his 
first governmental acts, exiled her from the country. 
Manuela submitted to her fate with festering dignity, first 
in Jamaica and then in a dismsl pilgrimage that would 
end in Paita, a sordid port on the Pacific where whaling 
ships from all the oceans came to anchor. There she en¬ 
dured oblivion with embroideries, mule drivers cigars, 
and little candies, which she made and sold to sailors for 
as long as the arthritis in her hands allowed. Dr. Thorne, 
her husband, was knifed to death in an empty lot in Lima 
during a robbery in which the little he had with him was 
Stolen, and in his will he left Manuela a sum equal to the 
dowry she had brought to the marriage, but she never 
received it. Three memorable visitors consoled her aban¬ 
donment: the tutor Simon Rodriguez, with whom she 
shared the ashes of glory, the Iti.ian patriot Giuseppe 
Garibaldi, who was returning from the struggle against 
the dictatorship of Rosas in Argentina, and the novelist 
Herman Melville, who was wandering the oceans of the 
world gathering information for Moby-Dick. When she 
was old and confined by a broken hip to her hammock, 
she would give card readings and advice to lovers. She 
died in an epidemic of the plague at the age of fifrv-nine, 
and her cabin was burned by the health officials, along 
with the General s precious papers, w hich included his 
intimate letters. Her only mementos of him. according to 
w hat she told Peru de Lacroix, were a lock of his hair and 
a glove. 

Peru de Lacroix found La Florida de San Pedro Ale- 





The General in His Labyrinth 


jandrino already disordered by death. The house was 
adrift. The officers slept whenever fatigue overcame them 
and were so irritable that the prudent Jose Laurencio 
Silva went so far as to draw his sword in response to Dr. 
Reverend’s demands for silence. Fernanda Barriga did not 
have the strength or good humor to attend to so many 
requests for food at the least expected times. The most 
demoralized played cards day and night, with no concern 
for rhe fact that everything they shouted could be heard 
by the dying man in the next room. One afternoon, while 
the General was lying in a feverish stupor, someone on 
the terrace bellowed his rage at the abusive charge of 
twelve pesos and twenty-three centavos for half a dozen 
boards, two hundred twenty-five nails, six hundred com¬ 
mon tacks and fifty gilded ones, ten yards of madapollam, 
ten yards of manila ribbon and six yards of black. 

It was a shouted litany, which other voices tried to 
silence but which in the end filled the entire hacienda. 
Dr. Reverend was in the bedroom changing the bandages 
on General Montilla's fractured hand, and both of them 
realized that the sick man, in the lucidity of light sleep, 
was listening to the list of charges. Mantilla went to the 
window and roared at the top of his voice: 

“Shut up, damn it!” 

1 lie General intervened without opening his eyes. 

“Leave them alone,*' he said. “After all, by now there 
aren't any costs I can’t hear.” 

Only Jose Palacios knew that the General did not need 
to hear any more to realize that the shouted sums came 
out of the two hundred fifty-three pesos, seven reales, 
and three cuartillos in the public collection for his funeral 




z6} 


gathered by the municipality from private individuals 
and from the slaughterhouse and prison funds, and that 
the lists were of materials for making his coffin and build¬ 
ing his tomb* From that time on, lose Palacios, following 
Monti]la’s orders, took responsibility for keeping every¬ 
one out of the bedroom, regardless of rank, title, or dig¬ 
nity, and he imposed on himself so drastic a regimen of 
caring for the patient that it differed very little from his 
own death. 

“If they had given me power like this from the be¬ 
ginning, the man would have lived to be a hundred," he 
said. 

Fernanda Barriga attempted to enter the bedroom. 

“This poor orphan liked women so much/ 1 she said, 
“he can't die without one at his bedside, even if she’s as 
old and ugly and useless as I am. H 

They would not permit it* And so she sat outside the 
window* trying to sanctify the pagan ravings of the dying 
man with her prayers. And there she stayed, living on 
public charity, submerged in eternal mourning, until the 
age of a hundred and one. 

Just after dark on Wednesday it was she who scattered 
flowers along the road and led the chanting when the 
priest from the neighboring village of Mamatoco arrived 
with the viaticum. He was preceded by a double row of 
barefoot Indian women wearing cassocks of raw linen and 
crowns of crape myrtle, who lit his way with oil lamps 
and sang prayers for the dead in their own language. 
They walked the path that Fernanda, at their head, was 
carpeting with flower petals, and it was so hair-raising a 
moment that no one dared to stop them. The General 





The General in His Labyrinth 


sat up in bed when he heard them come in the bedroom, 
shielded his eyes from the light with his arm, and made 
them leave with a shout: 

“Get those altar lights out of here: this looks like a 
procession of lost souls." 

Trying to keep the evil mood in the house from killing 
the doomed man, Fernando brought a band of street mu¬ 
sicians from Alamatoco, who played without stopping 
for an entire day under the tamarind trees in the patio. 
The General responded well to the calming effect of the 
music. “La Trinitaria," his favorite contredanse, was re¬ 
peated several times. It had become popular because in 
another time he distributed copies of the score wherever 
he went. 

The slaves stopped the mills and watched the General 
for a long while through the vines at the window. He was 
wrapped in a white sheer, more emaciated and ashen 
than after death, and he kept time to the music with his 
head, which was bristling with a new growth of hair. 
After each piece he applauded with the conventional 
propriety he had learned at the Paris Opera. 

At noon, animated by the music, he drank a cup of 
broth and ate a ground mixture of arrowroot and boiled 
chicken. Afterwards, in the hammock, he asked for a 
hand mirror, looked at himself, and said: "With these 
eyes I won’t die.” ' 'he almost abandoned hope that Dr. 
Reverend could perform a miracle was reborn in every¬ 
one. But when he seemed better, the invalid confused 
General Sarda with one of the thirty-eight Spanish of¬ 
ficers whom Santander had ordered shot without trial 
in a single day following the battle of Boyaca. I .ater he 
suffered a sudden relapse, from which he never rccov- 


ercd, and he shouted with the little voice left to him to 
get the musicians away from the house, where they could 
not disturb the silence of his death agony. When he was 
calm again he ordered Wilson to compose a letter to 
General Justo Briceno, asking him as an almost post¬ 
humous homage to make peace with General Urdaneta 
in order to save the country from the horrors of anarchy. 
T he only part he dictated was the heading; “I am writ¬ 
ing this letter to you in the final moments of my life. 1 ' 

He talked with Fernando until very late that night, and 
for the first time he advised him regarding the" future. 
The idea of their writing his memoirs together would 
not be realized, but his nephew* had lived by his side long 
enough to attempt to write them as a simple act of love, 
so that his children would have an idea of those years of 
glory and disaster. "O'Leary will wrire something if he 
doesn’t change his mind," the General said. “But it will 
be different. Fernando was then twenty-six years old, 
and he would live to the age of eighty-eight without 
writing anything more than a few disordered pages, for 

fate granted him the immense good fortune of losing 
his memory. 

Jose Palacios had been in the bedroom while the Gen¬ 
eral dictated his will. Neither he nor anyone else said 
a word during an act imbued with sacramental solemnity. 
But that night, while the General was in the emollient 

^jth, Jose Palacios pleaded with him to change his be¬ 
quest, 

“We have always been poor and we haven’t needed 
anything," he told him, 

I he truth is just the opposite/" said the General. ll We 
have always been rich and we haven’t anything left.” 


The General in His Labyrinth 


Both extremes were true. Jos6 Palacios had entered his 
service when he was very' young, by order of the Gen¬ 
eral’s mother, who was his owner, and he had not been 
emancipated in a formal way. He was left floating in a 
civil limbo in which he was never paid a salary and his 
status was not defined, but his personal needs formed 
part of the private needs of the General, with w hom he 
identified even in his manner of dressing and eating and 
in hts exaggerated sobriety. The General was not willing 
to leave him adrift without military rank or a certificate 
of disability, and at an age w hen he was not disposed to 
start a new life. And so there w'as no alternative: the 
legacy of eight thousand pesos was not only irrevocable 
but unrenounceable. 

“It’s the fitting thing,” concluded the General. 

Jose Palacios’ reply was abrupt: 
i he fitting thing is for us to die together.” 

And in fact that is what happened, for he managed 
his money as badly as the General managed his. After his 
death Jose Palacios remained in Cartagena dc Indias at 
the mercy of public charity, attempted to drown his 
memories in alcohol, and succumbed to its pleasures. He 
died at the age of seventy-six in a den of beggars who 
were veterans of the liberating army, writhing in the mud 
with the torments of delirium tremens. 

The General was so ill when he awoke on December to 
that they called Bishop Estevez with all urgency in the 
event he wanted to make his confession. The Bishop 
rushed to the house, and such w as the importance he gave 
to rhe interview that he wore full episcopal attire. But 
by order of rhe General it took place behind closed doors 
and without witnesses and lasted only fourteen minutes. 




267 

No one ever learned a word they said. The Bishop hur¬ 
ried away m a state of consternation, climbed into his 
carriage without saying goodbye, and would not officiate 
« the funeral despite many requests, or even attend the 
burial. The General was so weak he could not get out 
of the hammock unassisted, and the doctor had to lift 
him in his arms like an infant and prop him against the 
pillows on the bed so he would not be strangled by cough¬ 
ing. When at last he caught his breath he had everyone 
leave so he could talk to the doctor alone. 

I never imagined this damn business was serious 
enough to even think about last rites," he said. "And I 
don’t have the good fortune to believe in the afterlife." 

It’s not a question of that,” said Reverend. “It has 
been demonstrated that settling matters of conscience 

inspires a state of mind in the patient that facilitates the 
physician’s task.” 

The General paid no attention to the masterful reply, 
because he was shaken by the overwhelming revelation 
that the headlong race hetween his misfortunes and his 

dreams was at that moment reaching the finish line. The 
rest was darkness. 

Damn it, he sighed. ‘‘How will I ever get out of 
this labyrinth!” 

He examined the room with the clairvoyance of his 
last days, and for the first time he saw the truth: the final 
borrowed bed, the pitiful dressing table whose clouded, 
patient mirror would not reflect his image again, the 
chipped porcelain washbasin with the water and towel 
and soap meant for other hands, the heartless speed of the 
octagonal dock racing toward the ineluctable appoint¬ 
ment at seven minutes past one on his final afternoon of 



The General in His Labyrinth 


December 17. Then he crossed his arms over his chest 
and began to listen to the radiant voices of the slaves 
singing the six o'clock Salve in the mills, and through the 
window he saw the diamond of V r enus in the sky that was 
dying forever, the eternal snows, the new vine whose 
yellow bellflowers he would not see bloom on the fol¬ 
lowing Saturday in the house closed in mourning, the 
final brilliance of life that would never, through all eter¬ 
nity, be repeated again. 




MyTl.anL 


For many years I listened to Alvaro Mutis discussing his plan to 
write about Simon Bolivars final voyage along the Magdalena 
River* When he published “El Olrimo Rostro” [The Last Face], 
a fragment of the projected book, the story seemed so ripe, and 
its style and tone so polished, that I expected to read it in its 
complete form very soon a/rewards* Nevertheless, two years 
later I had the impression that he had relegated it to oblivion, 
as so many writers do even with our best-loved dreams, and only 
then did f dare ask for his permission to write tc myself* It was 
a direct hit after a ten-year ambush. Therefore my first thanks 
go to him. 

At that time the Magdalena River interested me more than 
the glories of the central character, I began to know it as a child, 
traveling from the Caribbean coast, where I had the good for¬ 
tune to be bom, to the distant, fogbound city of Bogota, where, 
from my first visit, I felt more of an outsider than in anv other 
city in the w-orld. As a student I sailed the river eleven rimes in 
both directions, traveling on steamboat that came out of the 
shipyards of the Mississippi already condemned to nostalgia 
and possessed of a mythic call that no writer could resist. 

On the other hand, I was not particularly troubled by the 
question of historical accuracy, since the last voyage along the 
river is the least documented period in Bolivar's life. During this 




ZfZ 


time he wrote only three or four letters—a man who must have 
dictated over ten thousand—and none of his companions left 
a written memoir of those fourteen calamitous days. Neverthe¬ 
less* beginning with the first chapter, l had to do occasional 
research concerning the way he lived, and that research referred 
me to other sources, and then to more and more until i was over¬ 
whelmed, 1 spent two long years sinking into the quicksands of 
voluminous, contradictory, and often uncertain documentation, 
from the thirty-four volumes by Daniel Florencio O'Leary to 
articles in the most unexpected newspapers* My absolute lack 
of experience and method in historical research made my days 
even more arduous. 

This book would not have been possible without die help of 
those who threshed the same ground for a century and a half 
before me and made my literary audacity easier: 1 would recount 
a tyrannically documented life without renouncing the extrava¬ 
gant prerogatives of the novel. But my thanks go in a very special 
way to a group of friends, old and new, who took as their own 
affair, and one of the utmost importance, not only my most 
serious questions, such as the real nature of Bolivar's political 
thought amid alt his flagrant contradictions, but also the most 
trivia!, such as the size of his shoes. Nevertheless, I value most 
the indulgence of those who, through abominable oversight, do 
not find themselves included in this grateful accounting. 

1 he Colombian historian Eugenio Gutierrez Cel vs, in response 
to many pages of questions, prepared a card file for me that 
not only provided surprising information—much of it buried in 
nineteenth-century Colombian newspapers—bur also gave me my 
first inkling of a method for investigating and ordering facts* 
Furthermore, his book, Bolivar Du a D‘w [Bolivar Day by Day], 
coauthored with the historian Fabio Puyo, was a navigational 
chart w hile I was writing, w'hich allowed me to move with case 
through all the periods in the character's life. This same Fabio 
Puyo had the ability to soothe my distress with analgesic docu¬ 
ments, which he read to me on the telephone from Paris or sent 
to me with all urgency by telex or telefax, as if they were life- 
or-deach medicines* The Colombian historian Gustavo Vargas, a 


*73 


professor at the Universidad National Autonoma de Mexico, 
stayed within reach of my telephone to clarify major and minor 
doubts, above all those related to the political ideas of the period, 
Vinirio Romero Martinez, the biographer of Bolivar, helped me 
from Caracas with discoveries that seemed incredible regarding 
Bolivars private habits-his vulgar language in particular—and 
the nature and fate of his entourage and, in the final version* with 
an implacable review of historical data. To him I owe the provi¬ 
dential warning that Bolivar could not cat mangos with the child¬ 
ish delight I had attributed to him, for the simple reason that 
the mango would not reach the Americas for another few years, 

Jorge Eduardo Ritter, Ambassador of Panama to Colombia and 
then Foreign Minister of his country, made several urgent plane 
trips just to bring me books of his that could not be found else¬ 
where, Don Francisco de Abrisqueta, of Bogota, w'as a persevering 
guide through the intricate and vast Bolivarian bibliography, Ex- 
President Relisario Betancur clarified doubts throughout an entire 
year of telephone consultations and established that some verses 
Bolivar recited from memory were by the Ecuadorian poet jose 
Joaquin Olmedo, With Francisco Pividal in Havana I held the 
long preliminary conversations that permitted me to form a 
clear idea of the book I should write, Roberto Cadavid (Argos), 
the most papular and accommodating linguist in Colombia, did 
me the favor of investigating the significance and age of various 
Localisms. At my request the geographer Gladstone Oliva and 
die astronomer Jorge Perez Doval, of the Academy of Sciences 
in Cuba, made an inventory of nights w f hen the moon was full 
during the first thirty years of the last century. 

From hU Colombian embassy in Puerto Principe my old friend 
Anibal Noguera Mendoza sent me copies of hh personal papers 
and his generous permission to use them with absolute liberty, 
although they were notes and first drafts of a study he is writ- 
ing on the same subject. Moreover, in the first draft of the 
manuscript, he discovered half a dozen mortal fallacies and sui¬ 
cidal anachronisms that would have cast doubts on the exactitude 
of this novel. 

Finally, Antonio Bolivar Goyanes—a distant relative of the 


2 74 


protagonist and perhaps the last old-fashioned typesetter left in 
Mexico—had the kindness to revise seven different versions of the 
manuscript with me in a millimeter-by-millinietejt hunt for con¬ 
tradictions, repetitions* irrelevances* mistakes* and typographical 
errors* and in a pitiless examination of language and spelling. In 
this way wc surprised in flagrante a soldier w ho w-on battles be¬ 
fore he was bom* a widow who went to Europe with her beloved 
husband* and an intimate luncheon for Bolivar and Sucre in 
Bogota when one was in Caracas and the other in Quito. Never¬ 
theless, 1 am nor very certain t should give thanks for these two 
final pieces of assistance* for it seems to me that such absurdities 
might have added a few drops of involuntary—and perhaps desir¬ 
able-humor to the horror of this book. 


Mexico City, January ($gp 


g ,g . m . 



Brief Chr onol 


onoiogy: 


Si 


rnion 



xvar 


( prepared by vinjcio Rome bo martin e 7) 


i 

1786 

< 791 

1 795 


1 797 

* 79 7- 
*798 


1799 

1 799- 

1800 
1 801 

r 0 0 2 


July 24: birth of Simon Bolivar. 

January ip; death of juan Vicente Bolivar, Simon's 
father. 

July 6: death of Doha Maria de la Concepcion Palacios 
y Blanco, Bolivar’s mother. 

Bolivar leaves his uncle's house, A lengthy lawsuit is 
begun, and he k moved to the house of his tutor, Simon 
Rodriguez, In October he returns to the house of his 
unde, Carlos. 

he Gual and Espana conspiracy in Venezuela. Bolivar 
joins the militia as a cadet in Valles de Aragua, 

Andres Bellos gives him lessons in grammar and geog¬ 
raphy, Ac this time he also studies physics and mathe* 
m a tics, both at home and at the academy established 
by Father Francisco de Artdujar. 

January tf: he travels to Spain, making stops in Mexico 
and Cuba, In Veracruz he writes his first letter. 

In Madrid he comes into contact with the Marquis de 
Uscariz, the scholar who was his true intellectual mentor. 
Between March and December he studies French in 
Bilbao. 

February fi: in Amiens, France, he admires Napoleon 
Bonaparte, He is enraptured by Paris. 


2 ?6 


May 26: he marries Maria Teresa Rodriguez dei ! oro 
in Madrid* 

July is: he arrives in Venezuela with his wife. He 
dedicates himself to caring for his estates. 

1 8 o y January 22: Maria Teresa dies in Caracas, 

October 23: he returns to Spain. 

j 804 December 2: he witnesses the coronation of Napoleon 
in Paris, 

1805 August is: the vow on Monte Sacro, Rome, 

December 17: he is initiated as a Mason of the Scottish 
rite in Paris, In January j8c* 6, he rises to the degree of 
master, 

1807 January 1: he lands in Charleston (U.SAJ. He visits 
several cities in that country, and in June he returns to 
Caracas, 

1 8 1 o April t$: he is confined to his hacienda at Aragua; for 
this reason he does not participate in the events of April 
tpi the first day of the Venezuelan revolution, 

June 9: he leaves on a diplomatic mission to London, 
Here he meets Francisco de Miranda, 

December $: he returns from London, Five days later 
Miranda arrives in Caracas and is a guest in Simon 
Bolivar's house. 

1811 March 2: the first Congress of Venezuela meets. 

July 3: Bolivar's speech at the Patriotic Society. 

July Declaration of Venezuelan Independence. 

July 23: Bolivar fights in Valencia under Miranda's 
command. It is his first experience of war. 
t 8 1 1 March 26: earthquake in Caracas. 

July 6: Colonel Simon Bolivar loses the castle at Puerto 
\ abello as a result of treason. 

July 30: together with other officers, he captures Mi¬ 
randa to bring him to military trial, thinking him a 
traitor for having signed the surrender, Manuel Maria 
Casas takes the illustrious prisoner from them and turns 
him over to the Spanish. 

September t: he arrives in Curasao, his first exile. 



2 77 


December if: the Cartagena Manifesto is published in 
New Granada, 

December 24: with the occupation of Tenerife, Bolivar 
begins the Magdalena River campaign, which will dear 
the entire region of royalists. 

1 8 1 | February 2S; the battle of Cucuta. 

March 1: he occupies San Antonio del Tachira. 

March 12: he is promoted to brigadier general of New 
Granada. 

May 14: he begins the Admirable Campaign in Cucuta. 
May tj: he is acclaimed as Liberator in Merida. 

June tf: he issues the Proclamation of War to the Death 
in Trujillo, 

Augutt 6: his triumphant entry into Caracas, End of the 
Admirable Campaign, 

October 14: the Municipal Council of Caracas, in pub¬ 
lic assembly, acclaims Bolivar as Captain General and 
Liberator, 

December f; the battle of Araure, 

i S 1 4 February $: he orders the execution ol prisoners in La 

Guayra. 

* 

February ta: the battle of La Victoria. 

February 2St the battle of San Mateo, 

May ai: the first battle of Carabobo, 

}uly 7: some twenty thousand Caracans, with The Lib¬ 
erator at their head, begin the migration to Oriente, 
September 4; Ribas and Piar, who have proscribed 
Bolivar and Marino, order their arrest in Carupano. 
September 7: Bolivar issues his Canipano Manifesto 
and, ignoring the arrest order, sails the next day for 
Cartagena. 

November mj: the government of New Granada pro* 
motes him to General in Chief, with the responsibility 
for reconquering the State of Cundinamarca. He un¬ 
dertakes the campaign that ends with the fall of Bogota. 
December 12: he establishes a government in Bogota, 
1^15 May to: in his attempt to liberate Venezuela, invading 


2 7 8 


through Cartagena, he encounters serious opposition 
from the city's authorities and decides to sail for Ja¬ 
maica in voluntary exile* 

September 6: he publishes the celebrated Jamaica Letter. 
December 24: he lands in 1 os Cayos, Haiti, where he 
meets with his friend Luis Bruin, a mariner from Cura¬ 
sao* In Haiti he has an interview with President Pction, 
who will offer him invaluable cooperation. 

1 8 l 6 March 3/; the so-called Los Cay os expedition leaves 
Haiti. Luis Bridn is with them. 

June 2: he decrees the emancipation of the slaves in 
Carupano. 

1817 February 9: Bolivar and Bermudez are reconciled and 
embrace on the bridge over the Neveri River (Bar¬ 
celona)* 

April //: the battle of San Felix, which is liberated by 
Piar* The liberation of Angostura, the control of the 
Orinoco River, and the definitive stabilization of the 
(Third) Republic are achieved* 

May 8: a congress convened by Canon josc Cortes 
Madariaga meets in Cariaco* This insignificant Cameo 
Congress ends in failure, although rwo of its decrees 
are still in effect: the seven stars in the national flag and 
the name Estado Nueva Esparta [State of New Sparta] 
for the island of Margarita. 

May 12: he promotes Piar to General in Chief. 

June 19: he writes to Piar in a conciliatory tone; "Gen¬ 
eral, !' prefer combat with the Spanish to these disagree¬ 
ments between patriots." 

July 4: in Casacoima Lagoon, hiding in water up to 
his neck to escape a royalist ambush, he begins a dis¬ 
course to his astonished officers in which he predicts 
what he will do from the conquest of Angostura to the 
liberation of Peru. 

October t6: the execution by firing squad of General 
Piar in Angostura. Luis Brion presides over the court- 
martial. 



2 79 


‘ 8 1 8 l*™“ T y JO: his first meeting with Paez, the leader of 
Los Llanos, in the hut at Canafistula, Apure. 

February ti: Bolivar defeats MoriUo at Calabozo. 

fme iy: he founds the Orinoco mail sendee in An- 
gostura. 

1819 February r$: he installs the Congress of Angostura and 
gives the celebrated speech of dm name* He is elected 
President of Venezuela. He immediately begins the 
campaign for the liberation of New Granada, 

August 7: the battle of Boyaci. 

December 17: Bolivar creates the Republic of Colombia, 
divided into three departments: Venezuela, Cundina- 

marca, and Quito, The Congress elects him President 
of Colombia. 

1 8 i o January it: in San Juan de Pa vara, Apure. 

March f: in Bogota. 

April tp: in San Cristobal he celebrates the tenrh anni¬ 
versary of the beginning of the revolution. 

November^ 37: he meets with Pablo MoriUo in Santa 
Ana, Trujillo. The previous day he ratifies the armi¬ 
stice and the treaty regularizing the war. 

1 B 1 1 January j; j n Bogota, planning the campaign of the 
south, which he will entrust to Sucre. 

February t 4 : he congratulates Rafael Urdaneta for hav¬ 
ing declared the independence of Maracaibo, although 
he expresses the fear that Spain may consider it an act 
of bad faith, to the detriment of the armistice* 

April 17; in a proclamation, he announces the breaking 
of the armistice and the beginning of a “holy war' 1 : 

The battle will be to disarm the adversary, not to de¬ 
stroy him/' 

-# 

April 28: hostilities break our again. 

June jy: Bolivar defeats La Torre at Carabobo* Al¬ 
though it is nor the final battle, at Carabobo he assures 
the independence of Venezuela, 
j 8 1 2 April 7: the bank of Bombuna* 

At ay 24: the battle of Pichincha* 


280 

June 16: he meets Mantlelita Saenz in Quito when he 
makes his triumphal entry into the city at the side of 
Sucre, 

July tt: Bolivar arrives in Guayaquil. Two da vs later 
he declares its incorporation into Colombia* 

July 26-27: Bolivar and San Martin meer in Guayaquil. 
October 13: he writes “Mi delirio sobre cl Chimbo- 
rait/ 1 [My Rapture at t l Chimborazo] in Loja, near 
Cuenca, Ecuador. 

1813 March t ; Riva Agiiero, the President of Peru, asks The 
Liberator for four thousand soldiers and the assistance 
of Colombia to achieve independence, Bolivar sends the 
first contingent of three thousand men on March 17 
and another three thousand on April n f 

May 14: the Congress of Peru issues a decree in which 
it calls on The Liberator to end the civil war. 
September /: Bolivar arrives in Lima, Peru. The Con¬ 
gress authorizes him to subdue Riva Agikfo, who has 
rebelled in favor of the Spanish. 

1814 January 1; he is ill when he arrives in Pativiica. 

January 12: he decrees the death penalty for anyone 
robbing the public treason' of more than ten pesos. 
January t$: a beautiful letter to his tutor, Simon Rod¬ 
riguez: “You educated my heart to liberty, to justice, 
to greatness, to beauty* 1 ’ 

February to: the Congress of Peru names him dictator 
so he can save the Republic, which is in ruins. 

August 6: the battle of Jurnn* 

December j\r Bolivar liberates Lima* 

December 7; he convokes the Congress of Panama. 
December p: Sucre's victory at Ayaeueho* All of Span¬ 
ish America is free. 

1815 England recognizes the independence of the new 
American states* 

February ta: the Congress of Peru, in gratitude, de¬ 
crees honors for The Liberator: a medal, an equestrian 
statue, a million pesos for him and another million for 



28 l 


the liberating army. Bolivar refuses the money offered 

him by the Congress bur accepts the sum Intended for 
nis soldiers, 

February tg, the Congress of Peru does not accept his 
renunciation of the presidency with unlimited powers. 
August 6: an assembly, meeting in Chuquisaca, Alto 
Peru, decides to create the Republic of Bolivia. 

October 26: in Cerro de Potosi. 

December zj: in Chuquisaca he decrees the plantinc of 

. nillo. "wherever to, » gr „J needfor 
mem, 

r 8 * 6 Ma > from Lima he informs Sucre that Peru has 

recognized the Republic of Bolivia. At the same time 

he sends him his plan for the Bolivian Constitution. 

June 22: the Congress of Panama is installed. 

December 16: he arrives in Maracaibo, where he makes 

the offer to Venezuela to convoke the great convention. 

December p; he arrives tn Puerto Cahello in search of 
Piez. 

t 8 j 7 January he decrees amnesty for those responsible for 

La Cosiata, He ratifies Piez as supreme commander of 
Venezuela, 

January t: he writes to Paez from Puerto Cabello; "I 
cannot divide the Republic; but I want you for the good 
of \ cnetuela, and it will be done in the general assem¬ 
bly if that is Venezuela’s desire.” 

January 4. j n Naguanagua, near Valencia, he meets with 
Paez and offers his support. Previously he had told the 
Congress of Bogota that it had “the right to resist in¬ 
justice with justice, and the abuse of power with dis¬ 
obedience." This angers Santander, who nurtures his 
dissatisfaction with The Liberator. 

January i2: he arrives in Caracas with Paez, to the 
cheers of the people. 

February j; from Caracas he sends the Congress of 
Bogota another renunciation of the presidency, with a 
dramatic exposition of his reasons, which ends: “With 


282 


these feelings I renounce the presidency of the republic 
once, a thousand* a million times * , /’ 

Alareh 16: he breaks definitively with Santander: “Do 
not write to me again* because I do not wish to answer 
you or call you friend/' 

June 6: the Congress of Colombia rejects Bolivar s re¬ 
nunciation and demands that he go to Bogota to take 
the oath of office, 

July $: he leaves Caracas for Bogota, He will not visit 
his native city again, 

September to: he arrives in Bogota and takes the oath 
of office as President of the Republic* facing fierce 
political opposition, 

September //; letter to Tomas de Hem; "Vesrerday 
I entered this capital and am now in possession of the 
presidency. This was necessary: many evils are avoided 
in exchange for infinite difficulties/' 

1828 April to: in Bucaramanga during the Ocana Conven¬ 
tion, where the Botivarisr and Santandenst parties are 
clearly defined. Bolivar registers his protest to the con¬ 
vention at the “expression of gratitude directed to Gen¬ 
eral Padilla for his assassination attempts in Cartagena/ 1 
June p: he leaves Bucaramanga with the idea of going 
to Venezuela. He intends to live on the estate at Anauco 
owned by the i\I njsiis del Toro. 

June u: the Ocana Convention is dissolved, 

June 24: his plans changed* he returns ro Bogota, to 
great acclaim. 

July if: in a proclamation issued in Valencia, Piet calls 
Bolivar “the singular genius of the nineteenth century 
,,. the man who for eighteen years has suffered sacrifice 
after sacrifice for your happiness, and has made the 
greatest one that could be demanded of his heart: the 
supreme command that he has renounced a thousand 
times* but which in the present state of the Republic 
he is obliged to exercise/' 


2 §3 


August 17: the decree of institutional dictatorship, im¬ 
posed as a result of the rivalries at the Ocaha Con¬ 
vention. Bolivar abolishes the vice-presidency, thereby 
eliminating Santander from the government. The Lib¬ 
erator offers him the post of Colombian Ambassador 
to the United States. Santander accepts, but defers the 
trip for a period of time. It is possible that the elimina¬ 
tion of Santander's office has an influence on the as- 
sassination attempt against Bolivar. 

September a/; Piez recognizes Bolivar as supreme com¬ 
mander and swears, before Archbishop Ramon Ignacio 
Mendez and a crowd gathered in the Plaza Mayor of 
Caracas: , . and I promise under oath to obey, keep, 

and execute the decrees issued as laws of the Republic. 
Heaven, which is witness ro niv oath, will reward the 
fidelity with which I keep my promise." 

September jj: an assassination attempt against Bolivar 
in Bogota. Manuclita Saenz saves him. Santander is 
among those implicated. Urdaneta, as judge at the trial, 
condemns him to death. Bolivar commutes the death 
penalty to exile. 

1 8 a 9 jartuary 1: in Purificacion. His presence in Ecuador is 
necessary because of conflicts with Peru, which has 
occupied Guayaquil, 

Jtdy it: Colombia regains Guayaquil The people wel¬ 
come The Liberator in triumph. 

September /j; he writes to O'Leary; "We all know that 
the reunification of New Granada and Venezuela is 
bound only by my authority* which must disappear 
now or later, whenever Providence or men so desire ., m n 
September /j: letter from Paez: M I have ordered the 
publication of a circular inviting all citizens and asso¬ 
ciations to express their opinions formally and solemnly. 
Now you can legally urge that the public say w hatever 
it wishes. The point has been reached whereby Vene¬ 
zuela speaks with no concern other chan the general 





284 


welfare. If radical means are adopted for saying what 
all of you really desire, the reforms will be perfect and 
the will of the public will be done * . * T " 

October 30; he returns to Quito. 

October 2$: he leaves for Bogota. 

December $: from Popayin he writes to Juan Jose 
Flores: “General Sucre w ill probably be my successor, 
and it is also probable that ail of us will support him; 
for my part I offer to do so wnth all my heart and 
soul/' 

December 1 f: he indicates to Paez that he w r i11 not ac¬ 
cept the presidency of the Republic again and that if 
the Congress elects Paez President of Colombia, he 
swears to him on his honor that he will obey his orders 
with the greatest pleasure. 

December iff; he categorically disapproves the plan for 
a monarchy in Colombia. 

1830 January / 57 once again in Bogota. 

January 20: the Congress of Colombia convenes. A 
message from Bolivar: he presents his renunciation of 
the presidency. 

January J7: he requests permission from Congress to go 
to V enezuela, i he Congress of Colombia denies him 
permission. 

Match 1: he hands over power to Domingo Caieedo, 
president of the Council of Government, and retires to 
Fucha. 

April 2-j: in a message to the Admirable Congress he 
reiterates his decision not to continue in the presidency. 
May 4: Joaquin Mosquera is elected President of Co¬ 
lombia. 

May 8 : Bolivar leaves Bogota to meet his final destiny. 
]tttie 4: Sucre is assassinated in Bcrruccos. Bolivar 
learns of it on July t t at the foot of La Fopa Hill, and 
is profoundly shaken. 

September f: Urdancca takes over the government of 
Colombia in the face of an evident lack of civil au- 




thorny. In Bogota, Cartagena, and other cities in New 
Granada there are demonstrations and pronouncements 
in favor of I he Liberator's return to power. Urdaneta, 
in the meantime, waits for him. 

September ig: on learning of the evenrs that placed 
Lrdaneta at the head of the government, he offers him¬ 
self as citizen and soldier to defend the integrity of the 
Republic, and he announces that he will march to Bo- 
gora at the head of two thousand men to uphold the 
existing government; he rejects in parr the request that 
he take power, stating that he would be considered a 
Usurper, but he leaves open the possibility that in the 
next elections, . . legitimacy will shelter me or there 
will be a new President . . finally, he asks his com- 
patriots ro unite around L rdaneta's government. 
October 2; in Turbaco* 

October ij: in Soledad, 

November IT; in Birranquiila, 

Decetnber a hr arris'cs prostrate in Santa Mam. 
December 6; he goes to the plantation at San Pedro 

Alejandrino that belongs to the Spaniard Don Joaquin 
dc Micr. 

December w: he dictates his last will and testament. 
When the physician insists that he confess and receive 
the sacraments, Bolivar says: “What does this mean? 

... Can 1 be so ill that you talk to me of wills and con¬ 
fession' ... How will I ever get out of this labyrinth!” 
December 1 7: he dies on the plantation at San Pedro 
Alejandrino in the company of a very few friends. 


tn every corner uf the world t>r» every subjoin iinik* the vim, Penguin 
represent* qu*kht> and variety—the very belt in publishing today 

For complete information about books available from Penguin—including 
Pelicans, P tiffin*. Peregrines. and Pen gum Classics—and h*iw to order 
them, write to us ai the appropriate address below Please note that fr* 
copyright realms the select ton of bucks varies I nun country to country 


In the t'tilled kingdom: Fur a complete lot of books available from Penguin in 
the UK., please write to Dept £ P Penguin Lid. Htirm>’u£t*vr 7 h l 

Middiewi. UB70DA 

In the I’nili'd States; For a complete list of hooks available from Penguin in ihc 
V S please write to Dept fl \ Penguin fion : 20 Bergen lie Id Svw Jtrsr* 
( 17621-0120 

In Canada; For j complete tt>1 uf bonks available from Penguin us Canada, 
pleii e write to Prrtfuiti Bti&ki Ltd t 2&)t John Stmt Mufiham, Ontario lJR 
fB4 

In Ausii Liliid: Flu a complete lii.1 of hooks available from Penguin in Australia, 
please write to the Marketing Department, f\*m?uw Bttoks l td, PO. B*n 757 , 
Ringm/wt Victoria if34 

In New 7# mlutd: F« a complete list uf htoks available from Penguin ra New 
Zealand please wore to the Market mg Depimmtni, FVrifuln Rtwfo t\7j Ltd 
Prtwttt Bag, TaLnp*tno AmUtmd9 

In Indln: For a complete list of hunks available from Penguin, please write to 
Penguin Ovenaw Lid. ?0ti trot Aptimne/tii, 5o Nehru Piute .Vest Delhi 
110019 

In Midland; Fist a complete list of books avnibble from Penguin m Holland, 
please wnle to Penguin Books Nederland B.V.. Pinibm 195 , NL- IJSGAD HVeip. 
Mttfurfands 

In Germany; Fora complete list of bunks available from Penguin, please write to 
/Vfijjnm Books LtdFrwdru hi truss e H* 12. D-6000 Franltfun Mala /. Federal 
Republic of German', 

In Spain: Rx a complete list of frsA-. ,ivjiJable from Penguin in Spam, please 
wnie to Longman fbtigmn Espaiia. C altr Sun ,Vm fdui (5 f 2 BOJ 3 Madrid. 
Spain 

in Japan: Ft>: <■ complete h*i of books available from Penguin in Japim. please 
writ? in Longman Penguin Japan Co Lid, Yamagmh Building. 2-12^9 Ku 
Jt mb* k 'ho, Chi i odu ■ Kk , A *k vo fOf Japan 



FOR THt SHST 6 N l>AJ» tfc BACKS LOOK FOR THC 



Imematkinalh return ned fiction from Latin Americas premier 
novelists: 


L O V I J N T H E I I M I O F t f IO L f tt A 

(uthntt (j art Li ifJrqutz 

r ' hjs masteriiittc charts an unrequited fcwe thit survives half a «mun 

Vtvsiacknllai if a \nremswy ufasti msbm* put* er T almost untainblv ttwchinis and 

altogrt her CSffawtiixiiiy* 

AVif\ U N-0 //VW <t 


IHF■ GENERAL E\ Ills l V H \ R [ N J ]| 

(itibfwt ■( t tire ill \ lilryufz 

I he \t>bd IWe-winning ntwdists most recent work us i matrmftccnt portrait rtf 

the i(^cndar> liberator, Simon Boifrir, "As alwayC md L V A fluky. *GtrcU Mirau 
like an JUlfd who has blcvsed i», once ajraui, with hi* musical prepuce " 


[HE STORYTELLER 

S/t/.rtfj Uqm 

A magical novel of a man who leaves the modern world foe the primitive Ybdiwuenga 
tnU am! Ikcoqm* its central member-the roller “A m*$rrrK imcrwe-jvinii .-f 
acruai myth ami novelist it imagmatum l nub K la dun, /ir \k 1 d* 7W ^ 
Retime 

lSB\tM 4 ~Ol+M 9 *i 


IN PRAISE Oh THE STEPMOTHER 

Ujto ILrgotflti , 

A passionate novel of family life ami erode love. The Mfrfilfyr fat Hw± Wfrtf called it 
powerful, intendiarv . ., i playful exploration of polvmLtfphoo* perversity.* 

ISBS&HVn~m.S 


At bookstores now 

















FOR I HE ilEiT IN PAPEkBACKS LOOK FOU THU PRNGL IN 



“In Salman Rushdie, India has produced a glittering novelist. . . 
a master of perpetual storytelling ' 4 - \ . S. Pritchett, The 
Ibrker 


H \ ft O LS \\ D I III! s I \ O f s T D R 11 S 

S*hm kaihdtf 

In, RushiHev rnewt humiuou£aiitJaccessible novelyei, twrdvr-yw^ild Hjrrw.in i.trf mi 
M Adventure tn return tr> hss Uiher (the Shah « ►r Blah,' his gift uf the gab “A mrt d to cheer 
even the most mournful heart " — Tbt B**tm Sunday G^ifrr 

ISBS U-H-OIS737-9 


MIDSIC H IS ( H H.t>R I N 

Salmm Kusbdx 

IV irn at the precise momern that India gains independence, Salerm Sinai Lives hit life 
inextricably linked to the whirlwind history of his nation \A magnificent and unique 
u ix k of hvtii m .* — f k' PkfaJklphut tntfmrtr 

m\ o t4 <inrtt $ 


At bookstores now 







^^Jabricl Garcia Marquez was bom in 
Araeara* Colombia, jn 1928, He 
attended the University of Begot! and 
later worked as a reporter for the Colom¬ 
bian newspaper El Espectador and as a 
foreign correspondent in Rome, Pans, 
Barcelona, Caracas, and New York, He is 
the author of many novels and collet- 
lions of stories, including No One Writes 
to the Colonel ami Other Stories t The 
Autumn of the Patriarch, Innocent 
Erendira and Other Stones, In Evil Hour, 
Leaf Storm and Other Stones, Cbmuck of 
a Death Foretold^ One Hundred Tears of 
Solitude, and Lave m tin Time of Chakra, 
Garcia Marquez was awarded the Nobel 
Prize for literature in 1982, He lives in 
Mexico City, 


€>vcr de«i£n b\ Nrtl Smart * <r>e* illutfratwrtln CaiWrenWli* 











“A major literary event. *. a fascinating literary tour de force and a moving tribute 
to an extraordinary man."—Margaret Atwood* The New York Times Book Review 

"'An incredibly romantic story . . * about an incredibly complex and 
contradictory character .”—Chicago TYibune 



9 


CAN 512 99 
USA, 5995 


780140 


148596 


















































